<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Rejected Stanzas</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="appendix" epub:type="appendix z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Rejected Stanzas</h2>
				<p>These Stanzas, omitted by Camões, were discovered by Manoel de Faria y Sousa, and published in his Commentaries (Juan Sanches, 1639). The whole are extant in three manuscripts. Number <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, the better of the two first, contains only six cantos: Number <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, belonging to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Correia Montenegro, embraces the whole poem. The third <abbr>MS.</abbr>, in the hands of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Luiz Franco, is given by Viscount Juromenha (<abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 419). It has only four “rejected stanzas”; the first three are those of Faria y Sousa; and the fourth is that of the established text (Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 79) with a few unimportant changes of words and rhymes.</p>
				<p>The Stanzas number:⁠—</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<abbr>MS.</abbr>
							</td>
							<td>
								<abbr>No.</abbr>
							</td>
							<td>1,</td>
							<td>48 + 2 fragments</td>
							<td>=</td>
							<td>49</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>”</td>
							<td>”</td>
							<td>2,</td>
							<td>(Correia Montenegro’s)</td>
							<td>=</td>
							<td>26</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>”</td>
							<td>”</td>
							<td>3,</td>
							<td>(Luiz Franco’s)</td>
							<td>=</td>
							<td>4</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td colspan="5">Total</td>
							<td>79</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>I will not here enter into the consideration why the Stanzas were left out. Many of them fully equal those retained in the popular “Lusiads”; but almost all contain something opposed to public, or rather to priestly, sentiment. A cursory glance shows that not a few want the polish and finish which distinguish the Poem. I have purposely followed suit for the sake of contrast and fidelity. Juromenha’s original text is printed <i xml:lang="la">in verso</i>, that the reader may judge how literal is my version, which, for additional security, was submitted to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J.</abbr> Aubertin, the translator of “The Lusiads.”</p>
			</header>
			<section id="manuscript-1">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Manuscript <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-1">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> Stanza 77 (modified).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-1-1">
						<header>
							<p>1</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>He spake in fury wood, like wight insane,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And straight alighted on the Theban way,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where mortal gest and human vesture tane,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He bore where new-born Phoebus bears the Day.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now spans his flight the Med’iterranean Main,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now spurns the bounds of Cleopatra’s sway;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now leaves to right the Garamántes-land,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And circumjacent sheets of Libyan sand.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-1-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Now leaves he Mer’oe ’mid the fiery downs,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fed by the waters of the Sev’en-flood River,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Realms which the high and holy President<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-273" id="noteref-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a> owns,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Christ His doctrine old and true Believer:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He passes drouthy land whose people wones</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lacking the Lakes that roll their waters ever;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The very birth-place of the secret Nyle</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who breeds the monstrous brood of crocodile.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-1-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Hence to the Prasum Headland fast he flies;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, making Mozambíque, in briefest space</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Becomes the Counterfeit, in Moorman guise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of one that held high honourable place.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, as the Regent much this Moor did prize,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Entering with somewhat sad and chargèd face,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Began the Theban thus his plaint to make,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Removing others who sat near the Shaykh.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-2">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (after Stanza 80).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“And eke, that credit these my words befall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Showing what plotteth yon false Capitayne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Know, when thou wendedst on thy guest to call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I heard this case debated ’twixt a twain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In what I tell thee make no interval,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I will truly tell thee how, where, when,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou canst destroy them; for I lief believe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We should deceive him who would us deceive.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-3">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> (after Stanza 10).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Between this Ocean, and the waters shed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To feed large Tanaïs, flowing ceaseless flood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dwell the Sarmatae races, who are fed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On mare-milk diet mixt with purpling blood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here live the Mysian peoples that o’erspread</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A part of Asia, low, inglorious brood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Abii who banish women; and with these</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A host of tribes that drink Borysthenes.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-4">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“But his ill mother following whither led</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her woman’s bosom ready aye to range,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Took Dom Bermudo to her marriage-bed⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Dom Bermudo’s brother takes in change.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>See the foul, sinful, bestial action bred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By crime begetting crime! Strange, mighty strange!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That left her husband she remains for e’er</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His marriage-sister and his married fere.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-5">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 2).</p>
						<p>Translated in the Millié-Dubeux <abbr>edit.</abbr> of 1862.</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-5-1">
						<p>
							<span>“The meed of valour Bastards aye have claimèd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By Arts or Arms, or haply both conjoinèd;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such were of fabled Gods the most enfamèd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To whom rude Ancients highest rank assignèd.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hermes, and doct Apollo still are namèd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For varied Science with long Art combinèd;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Others by Arms alone prevail; so reign</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bacchus and Hercules, that Theban Twain.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-5-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Homer and Orpheus, eke, of birth were base,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The pair by Po’etry raised to such degree;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And they, the Sires of that Imperial race,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who founded Troy and Rome for Italy.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nay, an in written legend trust we place,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though many Philip made the father be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Macedonia’s Youth, not few would prove</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Great Nectanébus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-274" id="noteref-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a>filcht his mother’s love.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-5-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Thus Justiciary Pedro’s bastard son,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Being exalted o’er the realm to sway,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By Gestes of arms such goods of Fortune won</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That equalled ev’ery Great of bygone day.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He, when his kingdom feared to be undone</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And prostrate lie, the proud Castilian’s prey,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bateth the terror his own lieges tries;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And in all others Esp’erance falsifies.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-6">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 11).</p>
						<p>Omitted because Catalonia and Arragon<br/>
						did not then belong to Castile (?).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Remainèd none in realm of Tarragon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who shirkt to mell in Mavors’ dour emprize:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>None in the noble City, whose renown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon her founder Scipio’s name relies.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And last not least the far-famed Barcelon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sent warmen tried in warlike exercise:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All these strong powers uniteth haughty Spain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against our little Lusitanian reign.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-7">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 13).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Oh, foes unnat’ural! Nature so misbred,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Race of thy race’s name disgrace that art!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Degenerates! caitiffs! say what feeble Dread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sans wisdom, reason, all Man’s better part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have made a gallant people, born and bred</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Loyal and brave with clean and candid heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Offend in such base guise? But I suspect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amid the Great this be the least defect.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-8">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (in lieu of Stanza 21).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“E’en as the noble Youth of Roman strain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strengthend the Senate, fain in fear to fly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Carthaginian who, all-sovereign,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His whetted blade to shrinking throats brought nigh;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When worth’ily winning surname ‘African,’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His furious force so did their force defy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His doubtful country free as air he made</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When jealous Fabius still his rede delay’d.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-9">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 27).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Now Titan’s daughter fresh and rosy came</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bringing that memorable, deathless day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Vespers chaunted are in Mary’s name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hon’ouring the holy month whose name is May.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This day for battle having fittest claim</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was chosen: Now, as paled the morning Gray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bleaching the skies, both Kings unsheathed their swords</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their hosts enheartening with hearty words.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-10">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 33).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“And, Emperors! you that held and had command</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O’er so much Earth, aye ready to resist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In asp’erous conflict, and the wrong withstand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of cruel Traitors raising Treason’s crest:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Complain ye not: Nay, well this chance attend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One of the noblest Kings, and loved the best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sees ’gainst his law, his crown, his self, his all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vavasors rise to sue a stranger’s thrall.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-11">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>.</p>
						<p>These Homeric stanzas on the deaths of Portuguese<br/>
						knights took away interest from the central<br/>
						figure, the King.</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-11-1">
						<p>
							<span>“Piercèd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-275" id="noteref-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a> Giraldo’s vitals through and through</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And eke the huge thick targe he snatcht away</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From Perez whom he killed; his own with hew</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And strangest hack of cutlass useless lay.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dies Pedro, and Duarte dies (in lieu</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of death amid the Brigians): Born were they</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Both in Braganza, brave in youthful pride</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Together lived they, fought they, fell they, died.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-11-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Lopo and Vincent de Lisbóa bleed;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sworn in the common cause to meet their fate;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or both the crown to gain and Victory’s meed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To snatch from all whom most enfamed this bate.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Afonso flieth from his battle-steed;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For five Castilians (who in ambush wait</span>
							<br/>
							<span>to ’venge five comrades slain in earli’er strife)</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Packing around him pluck his precious life.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-11-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Down falls Hilario drilled by spear-heads three;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But first he took the vengeance of his spear;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He mourneth not because his Sprite goes free,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But for-that comes in it Antonia fair:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Flitteth the fug’itive Spirit fast, and flee</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With it the thoughts sustaining all to dare;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And as life fled the service of his dame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fell from his clay-cold lips her broken name.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-12">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (in lieu of Stanza 39).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“His foll’owers favour with a piercing cry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This goodly lunge of lance; nor is he slow</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To snatch another (for innum’erous lie</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The weapons lost by battle’s losing throw):</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He runs with couchèd spear: His bravery</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Urgeth his Braves who, brent with martial lowe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the courser’s flanks keen rowels thrust,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lance the foeman level with the dust.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-13">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 40).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-1">
						<header>
							<p>1</p>
							<p>The corresponding deaths of Spanish knights.</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Velasquez dies with Sanches de Toledo,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A mighty hunter this, and that a clerke:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Galbes eke perisheth surnamed ‘Sem Medo,’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-276" id="noteref-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>For thus his comrades called for countermark:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Montánchez, Oropésa, Mondonhedo</span>
							<br/>
							<span>(Albeit skilled in arms, in sinews stark),</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fell by Antonio’s hand, stout youth and brave</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose lance more dext’erous drave them to the grave.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Braggart Guevára, who his front had dyed,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And hands and beard with blood that tinged the plain;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That he might bluster how the gory tide</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Had spurted painting him with honour’d stain:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Him, bell’owing such bravados in his pride,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pedro who heard the vauntings loud and vain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Felled with such side stroke, that his empty head</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Flew from his body and his base life fled.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Flew high in airy space his feckless pate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>While still a-boasting of some blatant Geste:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pedro, besprinkled by the squirt and jet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Feels black blood trickling down his beard and breast;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherewith the mal’apert pays his vengeance debt.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Carrilho’s sun eke setteth in its west,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Joam de Lorca and Robledo follow;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>While th’ other braves in flight their boasts must swallow.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-4">
						<header>
							<p>4</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Salazar, famous par’asite, and the head</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pander who made Sevilha town infame;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whom his false leman had at night-tide fled</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though to the ’campment she had brought her shame;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lief would with other friend this fair friend bed,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For-that the ducats wherewithal he came,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Were lost upon a cast; nor were they lost</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Had but a hand of spades came uppermost.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-5">
						<header>
							<p>5</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“His she-friend’s treason gars him wits to tyne;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And threaten un’iverse, earth and vagueing skies</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Blaspheming; and resolve with rage indign</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All who dare cross his valour to chastise:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Encount’ering Gaspar (who his Catherine</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Loves as his life) the broadsword fast he plies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Till air fire-smitten makes him fain believe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such stroke of mighty blade a hill could cleave.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-6">
						<header>
							<p>6</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Fondly he hopes the foe to hew in twain;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But Gaspar, sighting overhead the blade,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Runs in, and catcheth him with gripping strain:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Twas a fair feat of skill and hardihead:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Spaniard clippeth, yet doth not restrain</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His boastful threat’ening, although conquerèd;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The forceful Portingall with short delay</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unarms his hands and leaps from out his way.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-7">
						<header>
							<p>7</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Then, lest his foeman use such crafty mode</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Himself had used, he deals stoccado-thrust:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In fine the broadsword in his bosom-blood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He bathes that naught to vengeance mote he trust.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Flieth the furious ghost and in the wood</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tartarean still blasphemes; relates his lust</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For vengeance, who no more can scourge his quean,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>While him Alecto scourgeth long and keen.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-13-8">
						<header>
							<p>8</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“The Spatha’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-277" id="noteref-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a> metal to the damnèd host</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ill-names he calleth heaping curses dread;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which, when it entered not, his ducats lost,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And lost his life when it had enterèd.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pluto to gar him pay Sin’s scot and cost,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shows him the trait’orous ladye-friend who fled</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Joyed by his rival raining greedy kisses:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He starts to strike them but the Shades he misses.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-14">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 44).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-14-1">
						<p>
							<span>“Oh vain reflections’ guiling human sense!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How could this darkling error seal your sight?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How have ye hugged this gay and glad pretence</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That lures to ’sanguined hate and baneful fight?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And now of bloodshed dour experience,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A sore dread trial of the deadly blight</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is shown to thee. And now when known thy lot</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thou shalt give counsel which thou tookest not.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-14-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“The corpses of the Cavaliers, our fone,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fed the foul creatures of the field and wood:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The nearest fountains till some days were gone</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Distilled their crystal black with human blood.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The meadow-shepherds, and the swains who wone</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Upon the mountain, loathed the fulsome food,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The feral bird⁠—which for a year and more,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Smackt of the gorgèd flesh and human gore.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-15">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (Stanza 49: <i xml:lang="la">varia lectio</i>).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-15-1">
						<p>
							<span>Pond’ering such mighty deeds of derring-do</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Prophetick Proteus thus to Neptune cried:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>“I fear shall spring such Braves from Braves like these</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who the great sceptre of thy Reigns shall seize!”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-15-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“He gaineth now the Porte inexpugnable</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereof the Traitor-Count<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-278" id="noteref-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a> first oped the gate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In blood to wash the love inevitable</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fired in Rodrigo’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> heart by hand of Fate.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet this was not the cause abominable</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That wasted populous Hispanian State:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>God for some hidden judgment gave command</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The house be opened by Rodrigo’s hand.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-15-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“But now thou livest safe, O noble Spain!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>(If knightly force can save its land a fall)</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From other loss like this, from shame and stain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who for a Porter hast the Portingall.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This happy Fortune waited on the reign</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of King Joanné,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a> who the bounding wall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Spanish-lond molested many years;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And conquerèd a higher crest uprears.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-16">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (Stanza 61: <i xml:lang="la">varia lectio</i>).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Of Venice, splendid in prosperity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Venice, whereto the fisher peoples fled</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From Gothic fury, and the cruelty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Attila, and built the pauper town</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now raised to rich estate and high renown.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-17">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 66).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Nor chosen was sans justest cause and care</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fill the lofty throne of governance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This King, whose noble heart and spirit rare</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pledgèd and promised highest esperance:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For him, there being no directer heir</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And urgèd mostly by such confidence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Joanné chose as heir to reign alone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Having no son-inheritor to the throne.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-18">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (after Stanza 86).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-18-1">
						<p>
							<span>“There did we promise, if His mercy deign</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To bear us safe where Phoebus bursts the womb,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or to blind worlds we would His faith ordain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or headstrong Heathenesse to death would doom.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All for our Souls’ eternal health were fain</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With pure, veracious shrift our Sprites t’ illume,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereby, though Her’eticks may its power decry,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Souls like the ren’ovate Phoenix heav’enward fly.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-18-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Then to partake of Ghostly Meat we went,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By whose most gracious boon so many days,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sans taste of other earthly nutriment,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Erst were sustained Elias and Moysès:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bread, whose deep secrets ne thought eminent</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ne subtle lore, ne soaring fantasies</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall ever fathom, ever plumb its might,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>An to dark Reason Faith deny her light.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-19">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> (after Stanza 7).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>There, in sublime Italia, yawns a cave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Secret and celebrate, Avernus hight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherethrough the Trojan leader bold and brave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gainèd Infernus-realm of gloomy Night.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And als this Antre easy adit gave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By road untrod, to Ocean’s middle site,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Sea-god Neptune’s proper tenement:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now thither Bacchus ’gan the long descent.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-20">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> (after Stanza 24).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>Dolour of fell Dislove hath no respect</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For fault or for unfault on either part;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If what thou lovest lief thy love reject</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Only some sore revenge shall salve the smart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But say, What profit shall thy love expect,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When she thou lovest hath bestowed her heart?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How shall for others Love himself deny</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When Love delights his foll’owers aye to fly?</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-21">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> (after Stanza 40).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-21-1">
						<p>
							<span>“What boots recounting feats and gestes notorious</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of cel’ebrate Capitaynes and grand campaigns,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where vaunting Death boasts asp’erous might victorious</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O’er alien will he bendeth as he fain ’is?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Let others sing and say the deeds memorious</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Achieved by Conq’uerors on their battle-plains:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Let it be mine (if worlds will hear) to tell</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How by a pair of eyes’ mere force I fell.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-21-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>No little pleasure to Velloso gave</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So fair a subject watch and ward to ’guile,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For as dure warfare made him dour and brave,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So gentled Love his breast by soft’ening wile.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such is the cunning of this Cupid-knave,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>So Art with Nature can he reconcile,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>While mortal hearts with blandness it endowereth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lovers with double pow’er his will empowereth.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-21-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Recount” (quoth he), “recount of Love, fair Sir!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And of the wondrous chances Love befell,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Still his sharp arrows this sad bosom stir</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That may not hurt of open wound dispel.”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With him agreed each watchful mariner,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That all and ev’ery, then and there, should tell</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their tales of Love, and how the ventures farèd:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thiswise its watch to keep the crew preparèd.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-21-4">
						<header>
							<p>4</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Then quoth Le’onardo: “Here let no man wot</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From me to gather fables known of yore:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whoso would quote the tears of alien lot</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Himself exempted hath no tears in store.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sith Love with magick eye-glance mortals smote</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Those dearest en’emies mine smote none so sore</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Mid men as me; nor Pyramus nor him</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who from Abydos Helle’s stream did swim.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-21-5">
						<header>
							<p>5</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Fortune, who vaunteth o’er the world her might</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Already drave me far from Fatherland,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where I long time had lived, sufficient quite</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To lose a blessing which I held in hand.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yes, free I lived; yet nought astounds my sprite</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Save that my freedom I could not command,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But changed for prison, since mine every thought,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Would I or nould I, boon of Love besought.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-22">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> (after Stanza 81).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Thou Guard divine, who dost with Angels dwell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of the Starry Pole hast seigniory;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou who didst bring Thy people Israèl</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through the burst waters of the blushing sea:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If from more risks than what t’ Aeneas fell</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or Ithican Ulysses sav’edst thou me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Passing Apollo’s largely bounded path</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through rage of Aeolus and Tethys’ wrath.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-23">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> (after Stanza 94).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-23-1">
						<p>
							<span>Look ye, how following fast on fierce despair</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We win the weal that seemed beyond our range;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thus ever dogging happy days sans care</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Comes hateful Sorrow with her certain change.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whoso would win such lore, such secret bare,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How Chance shall aye Security estrange,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I wot, his wisdom would no blessing gain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But breed a madness in his brooding brain.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-23-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>I have short answer for the wights who say</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That fickle Fortune deals in living lies;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That God hath made for pillar of His sway</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A goddess ranging aye ’twixt fall and rise.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Importunate opinion men obey</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That Man, whose nature with the Angels vies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For whom his God such goodness wrought, is rulèd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By blindfold chances, and by luck befoolèd.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-23-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Who saith that Good or Ill be reason why,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The lowly up, the lofty downward, go;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What shall he say me se’eing the low rise high?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What shall he say me se’eing the high fall low?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If some should say “we’re born predestined,” I</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Find it an asp’erous reason so to trow;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If darkly bound by bond of Destiny,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What boots a Sinner or a Saint I be?</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-23-4">
						<header>
							<p>4</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Such dreadful storm the Portingalls tormented,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All were assurèd life was surely lost;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sudden it passèd and to them presented</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Venus the guerdon which they yearned for most.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Meanwhile Cabral whose wreck and wrack distented</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The list of losses on that portless coast,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Saves his life gladly, and at once he loses ’t</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Because what men call Chance or Dest’iny choses ’t.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-23-5">
						<header>
							<p>5</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>An he must lose his life in one short hour,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To save the span before what could avail?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We ask why Fortune’s all prevailing pow’er</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Upon the heels of ill sent nought of weal?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Well said the Sage, so famed for el’egant lore,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Simonides, who from his safe portail</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beheld his rev’elling friends within the hall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Crusht by the fragments of the fallen wall:⁠—</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-23-6">
						<header>
							<p>6</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Oh, force of Fortune grievous, sore to dree,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That hast so many in one moment slain!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Say for what greater bane hast savèd me</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whom thou hast savèd from this present bane?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Certès, the wrath of Heav’en right well I see:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No harm sufficeth for his rage insane:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor ill he workèd but the will he had</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Eftsoons of working something worse than bad.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-23-7">
						<header>
							<p>7</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Right well I wot that many shall be found</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With subtle reasons Faith to re-assure;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Many by Second Causes shall expound</span>
							<br/>
							<span>High matters sound sure judgment doth depure.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To all I pledge myself, I could respond</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Did art of scribe such mighty theme endure:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I but respond that long Experience</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Oft shows your Science lacking common Sense.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
			</section>
			<section id="manuscript-2">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Manuscript No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-24">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> (after Stanza 32).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-24-1">
						<header>
							<p>1</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“This the foundation-stone sublimely laid</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of the Braganza House, illustrious strain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which in estate and grandeur all outweigh’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whatever vaunts the high Hispanian reign.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Seest thou him, who with the stout Armade</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cutteth th’ Hesperian sea, forthwith to gain</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His brave objective; wends this stout pretender</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Azamor town to fight and gar surrender?</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-24-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“ ’Tis ducal Gemes, ’heriting from his sires</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of old nobility a name memorious,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who does this mighty deed; and ’s high desires</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fulfilled, to Portugale returns victorious.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This time a valour which the world admires</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Leaveth the Moorman in such fear inglorious,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who to the Present is nowise relievèd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of the cold burden in the Past conceivèd.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-24-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“And, if the famous Duke forbore as wont</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Catholick conquests farther still to bear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unto Marocco’s mures and Terudant,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And other thousand thorpes the Haven near;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Deem not his constant soul of spirit scant,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or wanting energy or slow to dare;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Twas that his loyalty to cross declinèd</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The certain limits which his King assignèd.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-25">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“In such unfairest odds and chance of fray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>One of our soldiers was begirt by foes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he, by valour more than mail, makes way</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of true warrior-heart fair ’surance shows;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Slain the near charger with his sabre-sway</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its rider’s head upon the plain he throws;⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brave sworder-feat!⁠—and, pace by pace, he leaveth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arear the foeman whom such exploit grieveth.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-26">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> (after Stanza 72).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-26-1">
						<p>
							<span>“Shalt see, in fine, conspire all India, ’drest</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To bellick apparatus; peoples rush</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cháúl, Maláca, Goa-town t’ invest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>At once such different sites to seize and crush.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But see, now Cháúl City sorely prest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The seas with em’inent billows flies to brush</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Castro, in haste his Portingalls to save</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When only God in Mercy’s aid they crave.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-26-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Se’est thou yon Paynim King so fain of fight</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Burn, overrun, beleaguer, firm persist</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In throwing forces which the land affright</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Against a little squad that loveth <strong>Christ</strong>?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But bear that gen’erous Pundonor in sight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ne siege ne battle e’er before hath wist;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>See how the sold’iery flying posts secure,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pass to the post of peril dire and dure.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-27">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> (after Stanza 36).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-1">
						<p>
							<span>“In such unfairest odds and chance of fray</span>
							<br/>
							<span>One of our soldiers was begirt by foes;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But he, by valour more than mail, makes way</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And of true warrior-heart fair ’surance shows;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Slain the near charger with his sabre-sway</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Its rider’s head upon the plain he throws;⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Brave sworder-feat!⁠—and, pace by pace, he leaveth</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Arear the foeman whom such exploit grieveth.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-2">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“There shall Ataide, most for prudence known,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Strong in the ghostly comfort of the Lord,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where Time and Need demand such force be shown,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With more than human valour aid afford.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Until its salvage object shall disown</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With grievous losses yon vile Pagan horde,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who crusht in thousand cruel fights shall rue</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The war, and hurry for a truce to sue.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-3">
						<header>
							<p>4</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“While here so happeth on the coast that glows</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of Asia and Am’erica sombre cold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>There not the less in Europe bellicose,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And Barb’ary’s wild uncultivated wold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall show thy Race, Elysian, valorous</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Its worth and with a freezing fear enfold</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The seething Zone, that sees one conquest won</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pass to three other and ne’er pause till done.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-4">
						<header>
							<p>5</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Barriga, brave of braves, they here shall sight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Guide of Zafim,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-281" id="noteref-281" epub:type="noteref">281</a> in war of prime account,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who finds no man-at-arms to foil his might,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O’errun the Mauritanian plain and mount.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But see how th’ Infidels, by luck of fight</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And doom disastrous, in the very brunt</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Make him and his Bellona’s battle-prize</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For in such chances Valour hopeless lies.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-5">
						<header>
							<p>6</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“But past the perils of this imm’inent chance,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>See how he snatcheth while to durance led</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From grasp of Moorish foe the beamy lance,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And lays with single lunge its lancer dead.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then with strong arm the weapon swung askance,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He saves his friends the while his foes have fled:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thus all triumphant wend his men their way</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whither their lot was sad captivity.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-6">
						<header>
							<p>7</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Lo! here is he by snare once more beset,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And in the darkness of vile stable lain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Loaded with iron fetters of such weight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From off the floor he mote not rise again.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But see the heart with gen’erous fire irate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Tear up the stake that showed a bloody stain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And brain the haughty Moor who had not fear’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Foul hand to fasten on his honoured beard?</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-7">
						<header>
							<p>8</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Yet further see yon faithless Hagarene,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By the commandment of his Inf’idel King,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Visit the daring deed with scourge so keen</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That strips from ribs his robes with stripes that sting.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet the brave Baron scorns one word, nor e’en</span>
							<br/>
							<span>An ‘Ah!’ a murmur, may his tortures wring:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To Portugale the ragged vesture goes</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wherewith to raise a ransom for the foes.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-8">
						<header>
							<p>9</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Behold yon Aguer Headland tane, and lost</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By fault of tardy succouring soldiery:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And see’st thou great Carvalho ’mid the host</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hostile, like baited bull the ring o’erfly?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hear him ’mid thirty Moorish corpses boast</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whirling his broadsword, crying:⁠—‘Since I die</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Let dead atone for this mine òbscure doom,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>These carrion deadlings form my fittest tomb!’</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-27-9">
						<header>
							<p>10</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“See how when both his legs a passing ball</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In pieces dasht and shanks from trunk had mown;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On arms and knees he doth his best to crawl</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And fight with force and valour never known:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Round and about the field evanish all</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hagar’s hard children who no pity own;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And with their shafts and javelins far they deal,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The death they dare not by a nearer steel.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-28">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> (after Stanza 73).</p>
					</header>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-1">
						<p>
							<span>“With sim’ilar labours, Gestes so great, so new</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of valour never viewed, nor reached by thought,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To Honour shall ye rise so high, so true,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To excellences Heaven’s will hath wrought</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Mid worlds of men for you and only you,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>While Phoebus warms what salty billows moat:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Rare boons be these which rarely doled we find</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To man, and only in you men conjoin’d.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-2">
						<header>
							<p>2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Religion first, the Truths sublime reveal’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In earthly garb of pious holy Zeal;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fain to Divine Obedience self to yield</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And all imbibèd with its works of weal.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thus men fare swimming to th’ Elysian field;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And thus in Life and Death shall ever deal</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mortals, who strain to win the princely prize</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which high religious Monarchy affies.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-3">
						<header>
							<p>3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Loyalty second, that makes great and grand</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Above all others, hearts of noble strain;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereby a certain likeness mortals fand</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To Choirs immortal in the Heav’enly Reign.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For this be known o’er farthest sea and land</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The passing merits of the Lusitan;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Ne’er to his Maker nor sworn King forsworn,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor holds such public Faith to public scorn.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-4">
						<header>
							<p>4</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Valour next cometh, which of yore did greet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In olden Lusus, men who sang and wrote;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And which your Portingalls with greater feat</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Certify veridic withouten doubt:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Affording novel theme to modern writ,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With their high exploits of memorious note;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, vanquishing o’er the world the most renown’d,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By fewer vanquisht they shall ne’er be found.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-5">
						<header>
							<p>5</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Conquest shall prove the fourth, which in the power</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of only Portugale full-forced resideth;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Since in the higher Hemisphere and lower</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O’er Earth’s four quarters she alone abideth:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The four great Nations only serve to show her</span>
							<br/>
							<span>What high mysterious Hope her conquests guideth;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That Christian, Moorman, Turk, and Gentile all,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Joinèd in single law shall feel her thrall.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-6">
						<header>
							<p>6</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Discov’ery comes the fifth, which of a truth</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To none save Lusus’ children doth belong;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who have explorèd all from North to South</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where suns be short-lived and where days be long.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Now by uncertain ways, unused, uncouth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From Ponent Lèvantward, in daring strong,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>She wends to circle Earth by shortest tract:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-282" id="noteref-282" epub:type="noteref">282</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>A feat which never was till now a fact.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-7">
						<header>
							<p>7</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“I pass in silence o’er the Piety</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And courteous ways that mark the Lusian breast;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Temperance, Holy Faith, Zeal, Charity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With other gifts as easy to attest.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For ’tis a not’able point of verity,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Moral Philosophy’s own rule and hest,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No single virtue e’er hath Man array’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When all the others do not arm and aid.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-8">
						<header>
							<p>8</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“But these, the first foundation and the base</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of those renownèd five transcendencies,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whereon they rest and rise by Nature’s grace,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And whence they borrow fair dependencies.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here I neglect; for stoop I not to trace</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That meaner matter which the tendence is</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of human nature in the gen’eral view:⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Only I tell what dwells in only you.</span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-9">
						<header>
							<p>9</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Natheless expect not to run clear and pure,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The course uneven of your Race’s story:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such the condition of our state obscure,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of human life-tide fragile, transitory:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Death and Destruction, travail sore and dure</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Shall mingle water in your wine of glory;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet ne’er shall force of Fortune, nor of Fate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Degrade your gifts, debase your high estate.<br/></span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-10">
						<header>
							<p>10</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“Shall dawn the Day o’er either Hemisphere</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By you explored, and conquerèd in fight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where battle, slaughter, prison-doom strike fear</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In all the peoples subject to your might:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The twain of mightiest empires which is peer</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In Spain beneath one sceptre shall unite;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Owning for cap’ital, Ladye of the Land,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The goodly City hither sends your band.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-283" id="noteref-283" epub:type="noteref">283</a></span>
						</p>
					</section>
					<section id="rejected-stanza-28-11">
						<header>
							<p>11</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>“And now, o’er earth establisht, Race renown’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whom God in Cath’olick bosom hath conservèd,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Redeemed from horrid pains of Hell profound,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For hosts of damnèd Heathenry reservèd;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dower’d with the losses of Lusbel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-284" id="noteref-284" epub:type="noteref">284</a> immund,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Lusbel, by vile and vulgar spirits servèd;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Since all Earth’s glories ye have learnt to gain,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Ware lest ye lose the glory sovereign.”</span>
						</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="rejected-stanza-29">
					<header>
						<p>Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> (after Stanza 141).</p>
					</header>
					<p>
						<span>“Hence shall he wend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-285" id="noteref-285" epub:type="noteref">285</a> his way, and end the light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of Life, when landed on that fatal Isle:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor less his vent’urous Fleet shall wing her flight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Returning homeward from such miracle;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The far-famed ship ‘Victória’ men shall sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anchored in safest waters by Sevile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When she had girdled Ocean-plain profound</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And circled Earth in one continuous round.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
