<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Now, free’d from the snares and perils which threatened him, Vasco da Gama quitteth Calecut, and returneth to the Kingdom (Portugal), with the glad tidings of having discovered Oriental India: Venus directeth his course to a delicious Island: Description of that same Island: Landing of the Navigators: Festive shows wherewith they are there received; the soldiers by the Nereids and Da Gama by Thetis (sic).</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>Fareth from Calecut the Capitayne</td>
							<td rowspan="2">(1⁠–⁠16)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Bearing glad tidings of the Orient;</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>To whom, amiddle of the tumid Main,</td>
							<td rowspan="2">(17⁠–⁠63)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Venus displays an Island excellent:</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Here from all nobly suffered loss and pain,</td>
							<td rowspan="2">(64⁠–⁠82)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Rest and Repose they find convenient,</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>And with the gentle Nymphs the livelong day</td>
							<td rowspan="2">(83⁠–⁠95)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>They pass in wassail, and in Love’s fair play.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-9-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Within the City long remainèd pent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor found a purchaser our Factor-twain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The wily Infidels by foil and feint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">made every trader cease from trade and gain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For all they purposèd, and hoped, and meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was there the stout Discov’erers to detain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of India, till arrive th’ expected Fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Mecan vessels and the foe defeat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There, where the City crowns the Red Sea bight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">founded by Egypt’s royal Ptolemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from his sister-spouse Arsin’oe hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to Suez changèd in our modern day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the harbour lieth at a distance light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from far-famed Meca, raised to high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by the false superstition and profane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Holy Water of the Moorish men.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gidà the hythe is ’titled, where the trade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of all the Red Sea shore-lands flourisht most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereby was great and grateful gain convey’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unto the Sóldan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a> who possest the coast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hence to the Malabars, by contract made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with th’ Infidel, tall ships, a potent host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>each year fares sailing over Indic seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>stocking their teeming holds with spiceries.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Upon these ships firm hopes the Moors had set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en as their puissance was so much the higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that these who sought their gains so grateful great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they might consume with crepitating fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For the good succour all confiding wait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from th’ Explorers naught they now require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>save to retard their sailing in such sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that the famed Meca-fleet should make the port.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But He who rules the Heav’ens and human race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who for whatever willèd hath His will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fittest causes from afar doth trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which shall His provident effects fulfil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pitiful accidents of ruth and grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dealt to Monsaydé, who, with guarded skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>devoted self Da Gama to advise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and gain his rightful guerdon⁠—Paradise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He, whom the Moorish rout might not suspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">being like them a Moor, but firmly thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a villain member of the villain sect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unveiled the frauds with foulest treason fraught:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The ships by distance from the shore protect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in stealth with pious heart full oft he sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>mourning the causeless evils that ordain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>malignant hate and vengeance Sarracen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He warns the wary Gama that th’ Armade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">due from Arabian Meca year by year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is that whereon his fellows’ hope is laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to be the deadly arm of certain snare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“They sail with armed hosts amain,” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“and Vulcan’s horrid thunderbolts they bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may ye read’ily fall an easy prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as you be poorly furnisht for the fray!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And eke the Gama, now considering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the time had come for him to quit the Port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and that no gladder tidings from the King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he could expect who doth the Moors support;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Factors left ashore straight summoning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he bade them haste aboard: And, lest report</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of such a flitting might their flight impede,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he bids them privily their steps to speed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But in the shortest space had Rumour flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on res’onant wing, nor here as wont did lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that both the Factors were in prison thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when found attempting from the town to fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Without delay the true report was known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to the shrewd Captain, who incont’inently</span>
					<br/>
					<span>reprisals dealt on certain who had sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Fleet to traffick with the gems they brought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now those detained are merchants grave and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">richards of Calecut in good repute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and in their absence all their brethren hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the ships withhold them and full true the bruit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But in the Fleet our Mar’iners brave and bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the capstans man, and each in several suit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is told to task; these haul the cables in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>those with hard breasts to shove the bars<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a> begin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Others to yard-arms hanging on let go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the sail that bellies with a bell’owing sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet the King heareth louder sounds which show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that fast the Squadron fareth homeward-bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The wives and children, dight to die of woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for their lost loved ones, crowd in tears around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Samorim, and piteously complain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from these their fathers, mates from those are tane.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Forthwith the Lusian Factors he restoreth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with stuffs in fullest tale and all-tax free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">despite the rancorous Moor who all abhorreth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so might the prison’d lieges renderèd be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pardon for his deceit the King imploreth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Captain greeteth, far more glad to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Factors than phrases hear; sets loose some Blacks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, making sail, adown the coast he tacks.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Down coast he tacketh, for he comprehendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that with the Géntoo King ’twere labour vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to knit those peaceful bonds, which he intendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">should strengthen commerce and her object gain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But seeing how the glorious Realm that trendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Aurora-ward, must aye well-known remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with these glad news he seeks dear Fatherland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sure tokens taking of what things he fand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He taketh eke some Malabars aboard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">parforce, the fellows by the Samorim sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when were the Factor-pris’oners restor’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of purchased stores he taketh hot piment:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor is of Banda the dried flow’er<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a> ignor’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nutmeg and swarthy clove, which excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>makes new Malucan Isle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a> with cinnamon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the wealth, the boast, the beauty of Ceylon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All this was gathered by the deft design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of true Monsaydé, borne aboard the Fleet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who thus of Angel-influences digne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is register’d in <strong>Christ</strong> His roll-call writ:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Blest African! whom clemency divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in prison-gloom with Gospel-light hath lit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who thus couldst find, from country forced to roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the way to mortal man’s true heav’enly home!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then turning from that coast of torrid heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the vent’urous Prores their southing courses bend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Nature pleased to place her farthest mete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Good Hope Cape, where Austrine shorelands end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bearing the joyful news, and hopes to greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their Lisbon homes from Morning-land they wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>again resigned to snares of terror spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by seas uncertain, glad, withal in dread:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The joy one’s own dear Land once more to view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sweet home and kith and kin to sight again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with whom old voyage-feats we face anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and tell of climates strange and stranger men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to taste the honey’d draught of praises due</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by long mischances, toil, and ill and pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>each hath of pleasure such a perfect store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the shallow vessel of man’s heart brims o’er.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Natheless the Cyprian goddess, who ordainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">had been her Lusitanian sons to guard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and by the Sire Eterne had been constrainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">through rolling years to lend them watch and ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Glory gallant toils and travails gainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the weals that nobly suffered ills reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for them ordaining was, who did intend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all their sea-sorrows in sea-joys should end.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In thought revolving for a season brief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how they had faced the might’iest Sea that flows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and thinking how the God sore gall and grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">worked, who in Amphionean Thebae rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she had already planned right glad relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a prize outweighing all their passing woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to find them rare delight and gentle rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>deep in the liquid crystal’s tranquil breast:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Something, in fine, of that repose so sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">refocillating bodies weary-wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for these her wanderers, and pay interest meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of toil, that short’eneth life of short-lived Man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then to secure the ear it seemèd fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of her Son-god, whose might of Gram’arye can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>degrade the high Divine to low terrene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and raise our human clay to Heav’en serene.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, duly pond’ering, all her thoughts incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there to bespread upon their wat’ery way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’mid waves of Ocean-stream, some Isle divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with bloom enamel’d and with green’ery gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for she hath many, where her realms confine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the First Mother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a> girt by ’bosoming bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>besides those Gardens of the Midland Seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>within the portals oped by Hercules.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There ’tis her will, the watery Damosels</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">await the coming of her hero-train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Nymphs who worth’ily bear the name of belles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for eyne a pleasure and for hearts a pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with choirs and dances, and by potent spells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bring secret hoards of Love their love to gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that all should labour with the best of will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Youths they love with lover-joys to thrill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Erst so she schemèd for the son she bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to her Anchises, that he welcome found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the fair country, where by subtle snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a single ox-hide spanned the spacious ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She seeks his aidance whom she may not spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fierce Cupid, in whose force her force is bound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that e’en as in her olden enterprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he aided, aid he now to pluck the prize.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yoked to her chariot are the Birds whose song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">doth exequies of Death in Life’s own tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and they whose figure took in syne gone long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Peristera<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a> who pluckt the daisies pied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behind the hasting Goddess troop the throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all through the lift with billing kisses glide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er on windy wings the Goddess flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with gracious movement she serenes the skies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now o’er th’ Idalian mounts her car impendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where for her coming waits her Archer-son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who mustering potent host with it intendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to fare on famous expedition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and rebel worlds debel till he amendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those direful errors long by mortals done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who love goods given by the Gods above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for man to use and not for man to love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He saw Actaeon, hunter so austere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so blindly bent on snatching brutal prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that to pursue some ugly beast and fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far from the human form divine he flies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Boy for vengeance sweet as ’tis severe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">charms with chaste Dian’s shape his hungry eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>then let the for’ester take him careful heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lest his loved Hounds upon their Hunter feed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He sees the wide world o’er how evry Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for public welfare naught doth reck nor feel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he sees that none the boon of love afford,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">save where Philautia<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a> counsels selfish weal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He sees how men who sit at royal board</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for words of wisdom aye prefer to deal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in sale of flatt’eries vile, which ne’er permit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the tares be weeded from the fair young wheat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He sees that men, to poverty who owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">duty of Holy Love and Charity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">live only pow’er to gain and wealth to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pretending Justice and Integrity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of ugly Tyr’anny breeding asp’erous woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they coin a right with vain severity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laws they devise in favour of the King;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laws which the lieges favour down they fling,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He sees, in fine, none love as all should love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">save that which dealeth only ill delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor for a longer time doth it behove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to waive a punishment as dire as right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He bids his summoned Ministers to move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">armaments, fitted for that mortal fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he lists engage with yon misgovern’d crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that hath till now allegiance disavow’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of these small wingèd Impes a band is set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to varied labours in their several crafts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">these on the grindstone piercing piles to whet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and those to shave and thin the caney shafts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Soothes ev’ery labour love-sweet canzonet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wedding strange chances to the song that wafts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sonorous melodies and roundels gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>suave is the song, angelical the lay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Th’ immortal Furnaces wherein they forgèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for their swift arrows points that penetrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with fiery Hearts by way of fu’el are gorgèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Vitals vital still that palpitate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The temp’ering waves wherein the tips were mergèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are lovers’ Tears in love unfortunate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The live bright light and never-failing fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is ever burning ne’er outburnt Desire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some hied their dext’erous hands to exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on the rude Vulgus’ hard unfeeling hearts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Re-echo’d through the welkin frequent sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of victims smitten by the shaft that smarts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fair be the Nymphs who deal the remedies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dear to the hurts they deal, and such their arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the sorely hurt not only they revive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but boon of life to life unborn they give.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Beauteous the many, while the few are plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">consonant with the qual’ity of the wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for to heal venom spread through ev’ery vein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the bitter’est Theriacks oft the best are found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Many are doomèd aye to wear the chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by subtle bond of weirdest witch’ery bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thus haps it mostly, when the darts acerb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>are armed and tinctured with the poyson-herb.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And from such wilful shots discharged sans aim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith those awkward Impes aye joy to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">arise a thousand loves that mar and maim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the victims wounded in such wretched way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">E’en of the Heroes boasting highest fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a thousand impious loves the sight dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was May Byblis, such the Cinyraean:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Youth Assyrian born, and that Judaean.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ye too, my Lordlings! oft have seen the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when love of Shepherd-lass your souls hath smit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and ye, my Ladies! oft the couthless boor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hath meshed your Ladyships in Vulcan-net.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These waiting nocturns to the tryst fain scour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those scale the casements and o’er pantiles flit:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet hold I mainly that such loves indign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>are more the Mother’s than the Son’s design.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now the light char’iot on the green depose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the pure white Cygnets, slowly softly wending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Dionaea, who conjoinèd shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">roses in waste of snows, is seen descending.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her Bowyer-son who dareth Heav’en oppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to greet her hasteth with douce smile unbending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while of the little Cupid lads a band</span>
					<br/>
					<span>crowdeth to kiss the Queen of Beauty’s hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She, to save precious time from vanities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whispers the Boy embosom’d in her arms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">confident thus:⁠—“Dear Son whose hand supplies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the firmest footing of my chiefest charms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Son! on whose pow’ers my power aye relies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou, holding cheap Typhoeus’ dread alarms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>her force by thine t’ enforce, an urgent case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bringeth thy mother to bespeak thy grace.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The Lusitanick toils well hast thou ken’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom I for ages watch with tenderest guise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Since sware the Parcae unto me, their friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they shall adore my name, my favour prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, as their feats of armèd prowess shend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all feats of rival Rome, I lief devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>some mode of aidance in what things I may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>far as our force o’er man extendeth sway.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, seen how hateful Bacchus hath beguile’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with mortal plots, their course on Indic plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and how by wavy Ocean’s injuries foil’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rather than tirèd they were lost or slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I will that in this sea to them so wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’mid ever restless waves their rest be tane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here shall they gather guerdon sweet and glorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of toils that make the names of men memorious.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Wherefore I pray thee, Son! forthwith go fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Nereus-maidens on their deep-sea ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">burn they with Lusian love, bring warm desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to these Explorers of a world new found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all in an Islet joined in glorious choir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">an Isle unknown in Ocean-depths profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>embowel’d, I will haste on high to raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where lovely Flora with her Zephyr plays:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There with a thousand sherbets, odorous wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">delicious viands, perfumed breath of roses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in sing’ular scenes of palace crystalline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fair couches, fairer what on couch reposes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with thousand joys unvulgar shall, in fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">each Nymph await the Brave her fancy chooses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and all love-smitten, longing to bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what Hope can figure, or what eyes can show.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Tis my good will that in the Neptune-reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my place of birth, a fair brave race be born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which a shrewd proof shall be to worlds malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and to the rebels who thine empire scorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that nought shall save, ne mure adamantine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne triste Hypocrisy, these men forsworn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er shall these earth-things hope their selves to save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when burn immortal Love-fires ’neath the wave.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus willeth Venus and her wilful Boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">obeys, and flies to see her will be done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he bids them bring his bow of ivory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with golden-headed arrows many a one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Cyprian with glad gest of wanton joy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">within her chariot receives her son;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and slacks the bridles for the Birds whose song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Phaëtonian death wailed loud and long.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Cupid warneth that still wants their scheme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a famous Go-between of high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who, though a thousand times she baulked his aim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a thousand times firm friend prefer’d to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gigantia was the Goddess, daring dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">vain-glorious, boastful, false and true was she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who sees with hundred eyne, flies every where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and that she sees a thousand tongues declare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They wend to seek and send her on in state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to blow her trumpet of the clearest strain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and so the wandering Braves to celebrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as never mortals could such praises gain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now Fame, with murm’uring sounds that penetrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">flies through the deepest grottos of the Main:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and scatt’ereth Truth believèd true to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for Fame’s own gossip is Credulity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These goodly lauds, and rumours excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the hearts of God and Goddess, whilom firèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Bacchus and to harm the Heroes bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">changed and with something likest love inspirèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The fem’inine bosom, ever diligent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in shifting will, of settled will soon tirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>now crieth cru’elty, shame and over zeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for such high valour evil will to feel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile the lither Lad had loosed his bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shaft urging shaft; loud groans from Ocean rise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They pierce point-blank the waves that restless flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">these straight, those whirling in a spiral guise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The fair Nymphs fall and breathe the secret throe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the ’bosomed burden of their burning sighs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>each falls ere seen the face that makes her die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for oft the ear hath loved before the eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now of his iv’ory Lune the cusps drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with might and main th’ indomitable Boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who fired at Tethys more than any fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for-that was she to love the coyest coy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now of its arrows is the quiver bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor lives in sea-plain Nymph her life to ’joy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, if the wounded breathe a living breath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’tis but to savour that they strive with Death.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Give way, ye tall cerulean waves, give way!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for look ye, Venus brings her medicine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">showing the snow-white belly’ing sails that stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er swelling crests of billows Neptunine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That thou reciprocal response convey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh ardent Love! to longings feminine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>an honest modesty must ne’er withstand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whatever Venus deigneth to command.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now the fair Nereid-choir itself enrol’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and side by side the gentle bevy sped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with tripping dances, usance known of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">straight for that Island whither Venus led:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And there the Goddess ’gan to all unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her thousand feats of loving hardihed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They, to be victims of sweet Love preparèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>each trick would try and dare whate’er she darèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Cutting the broad highway the vessels ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er ample Ocean seeking Home’s dear shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wishing but cool sweet water to provide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for their long voyage briny waters o’er:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When all attonce with start of joy descried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Love’s Isle rise lovely stretched their eyes before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as bursting radiant through the morning air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>rose Memnon’s Mother delicately fair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The bien and bonny Isle afar they hail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Venus wafted through the wavy flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(e’en as the Zephyrs waft the snow-white sail)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whither the sturdy Fleet fast sailing stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and lest unheeding pass the crews, and fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there to take harbour as she willed they should,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>right on their courses threw her lovely bower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that Acidalian of omnip’otent power.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Firm and immobile she disposed it where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she saw the seamen seek and shape their way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so fixt stood Delos when Latona bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Phoebus and her who joys in forestry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thither the hurrying Prores thro’ Ocean tare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where bends the seaboard in a little bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>quiet and curved, upon whose snow-white sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>her rosy shells strewed Cytheréa’s hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Three fairy hillocks threefold headlets showèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">swelling superbly gracious to the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose greeny clothing grass-enamel’d glowèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in that fair joyous Island of Delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While glassy-clear three limpid fountains flowèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from peaks with gleaming verdure deckt and dight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and from the milk-white rocks derivèd flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>fugitive wavelets, prattling as they go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Down a sweet dale that dints the hillocks, glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the sparkling waters to their trysting-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and make a table of so fair a tide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">never could Fancy such a landskip trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O’erhang it graceful groves on ev’ry side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">like one who bendeth pranking form and face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and in the crystal mirror joys to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his proper semblance and resemblance true.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Skywards a thousand trees rise tall and straight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">apple’d with od’orous fruitage passing rare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here th’ Orange painteth on her dainty freight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the hues that burnt in Daphné’s burnisht hair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Droops low crusht earthwards by her juicy weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Citron glowing with her saffron gear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lemons with scented spherelets deckt and drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>mock budding honours of the maiden’s breast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The forest-growths that clothe the hillocks trine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with frondent ringlets fronts and heads array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alcides’ Poplars with the Laurels twine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">loved by the laurel’d fair-faxt Lord of Day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Cytheraea’s Myrtles with the Pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Cybelé, to strange amour a prey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spiring Cypress pointeth to the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where man hath built his air-based Paradise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Pomona’s choicest gifts spontaneous grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and all in diff’erent taste and gust abound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no want of cult’uring hand these arbours know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">withouten culture better fares the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cherries with Tyrian tincture purpled glow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Morus eke that mimicks Amor’s sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while from her patrial Persia-land the Pome<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>flourisheth fairer in her foreign home.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gapes the Granado tints incarnadine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereby, O Ruby! shent is all thy sheen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’braced by her husband-Elm the happy Vine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">beareth her berrièd birth, here red, there green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And ye, O Pears! if long your boughs design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with luscious pyramids to deck the scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>busk ye to ’dure what hurt and harm may wreak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to your soft flanks the Bird’s injurious beak.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The gorgeous tapestry, rare colours blending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and robing rustick earth with rainbow dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">makes Achaemenia’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a> webs the less resplending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet softer shades on sombre vales to lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here the Cephisian flow’er<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a> his head low bending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">eyeth the lakelet lucid as the sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There Cinyras’ grandson-son<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a> still bleeds in bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, Paphian goddess! still thou wail’st his doom.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twere hard, in sooth, to judge which case be true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where sim’ilar splendours mantle earth and air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if fair Aurora lend the flow’ers her hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or if the flowers lend her hues so fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There Zephyr aided Flora to bestrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Vi’olet with colours Love-wan lovers wear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with Iris red and freshest blooth of Rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which on the Damsel’s cheek all beauteous glows:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The snow-white Lily with the rory tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Dawntide dripping, and the Mangerona:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Letters on hyacinthine leaves appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hyacinth loved by son of lone Latona:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Each fruit and flow’ering Daisy shows full clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that fain would Chloris rival with Pomona.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, if the Birds disport on airy wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth has a joyaunce for each four-foot thing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Along the streamlet sings the snowy Swan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">percht on her spraylet answereth Philomel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Startled Actaeon stands no more to scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his horny forehead where the waters well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here the fast lev’ret flies the hunter-man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from densest thicket, or the shy gazelle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There hurrying homewards to her darling brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the light-wing’d Birdie bears the grateful food.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Mid such a freshness swift-foot sprang aground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our second Argonauts, far-left the Fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where in the wood-depths willing to be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">strolled the fair Nymphs as though no fear they weet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These waked the Zitter’s soft pathetic sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those made the Harp and Flute sing song as sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and bearing golden bows appeared a few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the prey pursuing they did not pursue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus taught their Tut’oress in such teaching wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to scatter careless o’er the hill and plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so might the Barons see’ing a doubtful prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">first burn with hot desire the prize to gain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Some maids whose natural charms the veil despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in pride of soveran Beauty justly vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>casting all Art’s adulteries aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bathe their pure bodies in the pearly tide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But the stout seamen when their feet were set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ashore, all hastenèd to greet the strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor was there any who his ship had quit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sans hopes of finding game upon the land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">None think such game that needs ne springe ne net</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on those fair hillocks thus would come to hand;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>so bien, so bonny, so benign a prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by Venus cast love-wounded in their way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some with the spingard armed and arbalest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hoping to slay the horny hart or hind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in sombre bosques and valleys hotly prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">determined Vert and Venerie to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Others in shadows that high noon arrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from scorching verdant turf, to walk incline’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>along the gentle riv’ulet’s grassy reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>o’er the white pebbles purling to the beach.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Begin with sudden start the Youths to ’spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">variegate colours glance through greeny boughs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">colours that catch the judgment of man’s eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as not of nat’ural bloom, ne flow’er, ne rose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but fleecy laine and silk of diff’erent dye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dress, that with double force Desire endows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherein the human Rose herself enshrines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, Art enhancing Nature, brighter shines.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Loud cries Velloso, marv’elling at the sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“My masters! wondrous game,” quoth he, “is this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if yet endure that olden Pagan rite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Grove be sacred to the Goddesses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here meet we more than what the human Sprite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ever desirèd; and right well we wis</span>
					<br/>
					<span>excellent wonders and great things here lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by Nature veiled from Man’s imprudent eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Follow we fast these Goddesses, and speer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">an they be Fantasm or divine indeed!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus he; and, fleeter than the fleet-foot deer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all follow coursing o’er the riv’erine mead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Between the branches flying Nymphs appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">haply with more of hurry than of speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, slack’ening pace with shrieks and laughter gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>each yields her graces as her greyhound’s prey.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From this the breezes golden tresses blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from that the robe’s frail hem is reft aside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">High burns Desire, enkindled by the snow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of living loveliness so sudden ’spied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">One falls apurpose, and her fall doth show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by loving languor more than plaint or pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>she wills her follower stumble, falling o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the lovely quarry on the pebbly shore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Others seek other places where the stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">reveals of bathing Nymphs the secret charms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who startled ’gin to fly with shriek and scream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as though surprised by rude assault of arms.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While others feigning to feel less esteem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for fear and shame than force, veil false alarms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>plunge in the brake and give to greedy eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>denied to grasping hands the goodly prize.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That, who in hurry to resume contrives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the modesty that marks the Hunter-maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hides in the wave her limbs; another strives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to snatch the garment on the stream-bank laid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Youngling there is who in the river dives</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all clad and booted (lest too long delay’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by doffing garments he should miss the game),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to quench in water Love’s consuming flame.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As Hound of Hunter, crafty beast and ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">taught cripples to retrieve from brook or tarn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeing the steely tube upraised in air;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">cov’ering the well-known quarry, duck or hern;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ere heard the crack, uneath the sight to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he plungeth, certain praise and prize to earn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and swimmeth barking: Thus the Brave made free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to seize the Fair⁠—no Phoebus’ sister she!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Le’onard, a soldier whom good gifts adorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a knightly Belamour and delicate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who was not once the prey of Cupid’s scorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but ever dree’d Love’s life-long spite and hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he, who so long believed he was not born</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to Love-luck being e’er unfortunate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>not that he held all Hope beyond his range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when Destiny shall deign his doom to change:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here willed his Fortune, he should wing his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">chasing the fairest Daughter of the Wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ephýre, lief to make him dearly pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that which for giving Nature to her gave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Spent by the race he stayed his steps to say:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“O thou too beauteous cruelty to crave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when of my life the palm to thee is dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ah! wait this body since thou hast its sprite!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“All rest of running weary, Nymph divine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Each yields her wishes to her en’emy’s will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why to the wood alone fly only mine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who told thee I am I, who chase thee still?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If told thee so mine angry doom malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which allwheres dogs me always to mine ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>believe it not, e’en I when I believèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>each hour a thousand times my heart deceivèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Tire not thyself, to tire me; for if I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">must chase those flying charms and chase in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such is my Fortune an thou wait and try</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her will perverse shall never gar me gain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wait! if thou will I would again descry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what subtle mode of ’scape for thee remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thou in fine shalt note, and fain confess so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span xml:lang="it">Tra la spiga e la man qual muro è messo.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah, fly me not! E’en so may Time foot-fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne’er from thy youthful beauties urge his flight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For only stay the twinkling of thy feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and thou shalt vanquish Fortune’s dure despight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What Emp’eror, nay what mighty Host dare meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the force array’d by Chance’s furious might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which in whate’er I wished still hounds my way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>this canst thou do, thou only, an thou stay?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Wouldst in my roll of foes thyself enrol?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To back the stronger is not bravely done!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wouldst steal my lib’eral heart that was so whole?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Loose it me then, the faster thou shalt run!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Burdens thee not this Soul, my mesquin Soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which in those threads of glancing gold bespun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>tangled thou bearest? or thus won the prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hast lightened Fortune which so heavy lies?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In this sole Esp’erance thee, my Fair, I chase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that or thou weary her sad load to bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or haply shall thy Beauty’s magick grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">have power to change her sour malignant Star:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And if thus change she, cease this useless race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Love shall smite thee, gentle Ladye fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt wait when Love shall smite thee sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and if thou wait what wait I, want I more?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No longer fled the lovely Nymph, to play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her sad pursuer’s heart, her pow’er to try;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as still to revel in the lovely lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which told the soldier’s loving agony:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bending her brow that beamed a holy ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all bathed with sweetest smiles of gentle joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>she falls a victim at the victor’s feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>melted with purest love by dear defeat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah me! what hungry kissings wake the wood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What choirs in suavest unison acclaim!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What pretty pettings! What coy pettish mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which pleasant laughter presently became!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What Morn and Noontide saw and understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as Venus joyed her lovers’ joys to ’flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>were better far t’ experience not to judge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yet judge it he whose Fate such boon shall grudge.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This way in fine conform the fair and bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nymphs, and each Bride with love her Groom endowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all heads are crowned with chaplets of delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of bays and gold and amaranthine flowers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their soft white palms they prest in wedded plight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With formal phrase and stipulating powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that pledge for endless time their mutual Faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>honour and joyaunce, till life end in Death.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One, chiefest She, whose mandate proudly led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Nymphs, obedient vassals of her throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Coelus and Vesta’s progeny ’twas said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as by her queenly bearing might be known;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who over Earth and Ocean glamour shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the noble Captain, digne such boon to own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with honest princely pomp comes forth to greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as for such great egregious Ladye meet:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, told the station and the name of her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in high exordium with high grace ornate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her cause of coming ’gan to him prefer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the high influ’ence of immobile Fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and ope before his eyne the gen’eral sphere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of vasty regions, seas unnavigate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the secret knowledge couched in prophecy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which he and his alone deserved to see;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Taking his hand in hers she guides her guest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">straight to a tow’ering head of Hill divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereof a splendid Pleasaunce is the crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">plated with purest gold and crystal shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Therein the greater part of day they rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where loving play and lasting pleasures reign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Queen enjoys her loves in palace-bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Nymphs in sylvan shades amid the flowers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-88">
				<header>
					<p>88</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Fair and Brave in fittest union meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while minute by the merry hours of light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and taste the genial gladness rare as sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which their long labours and dark days turn bright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Man’s high heroick deed, and daring feat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of famous force, the World shall aye requite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with guerdon merited, and boon sublime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a Name and Fame that stand the test of Time.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-89">
				<header>
					<p>89</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For, all our Ocean-maids so fair, so sprightful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tethys, and eke her Isle of angel-ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">None other thing be they, but the delightful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Honours that make our human life renown’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That high pre-em’inence and that glory rightful</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are but the Triumphs, and the brows becrown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with Palms and Bay-wreaths, wond’ering gaze and praise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such the delights my fabled Isle displays;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-90">
				<header>
					<p>90</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These Immortalities⁠—in young world feignèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by men who cherisht toils of noble aim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there on Olympus’ star-lit heights, attainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on inclyt wings that soar to deathless Fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose Deeds of Derring-do the guerdon gainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by dint of endless toil and moil we name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Path of Virtue, stony, steep t’ ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but joyous-glad, delicious-sweet at end:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-91">
				<header>
					<p>91</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Were nought but prizes brother-men impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in change for Feats immortal, sovereign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to that baronial Host, whose Arm and Art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">made to be Gods that had been only men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Jupiter, Phoebus, Mercury, and Mart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Aeneas, Rom’ulus, and the Theban twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ceres, Diana, Juno, Pallas, were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but human flesh to human weakness heir.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-92">
				<header>
					<p>92</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet Fame, that trumpet of Man’s high emprize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on Earth bestowed them names of strange estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Godheads, and deathless Semi-deities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Indigetes and Heroes, “Grand” and “Great.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wherefore, oh, ye! who Fame’s fair guerdon prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if in the World with these ye lief would mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>awake from Slumber, shake off Sloth ignave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that sinks Man’s freeborn soul to soul of slave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-93">
				<header>
					<p>93</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And bridle Av’arice-sin with iron bit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rein that Ambition which o’er-reigns your race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in thousand fashions, and the base conceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of vicious Tyr’anny breeding vile disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Such tinkling honours, gold so counterfeit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to true and honest worth ne’er raised the base:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better to merit and the meed to miss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>than, lacking merit, every meed possess.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-94">
				<header>
					<p>94</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or give us Peace, and Laws impartial deal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that baulk the rich from plund’ering poorer men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or cloak your forms in coats of flashing steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and crush the law of hostile Saracen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus shall your valour raise the Commonweal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all gaining ampler, none a smaller gain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>deservèd riches shall to you be rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with Honours, alt-relief of human life.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-95">
				<header>
					<p>95</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus shall ye serve the King ye love so dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">now with your proffer’d counsels sagely bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then by the Sword, that shall your names uprear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to dizzy heights where trod your sires of old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To ’tempt impossibilities forbear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who wills aye finds a way; and thus enrol’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>your names shall rival this heroick band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and gain fair greeting in Dame Venus’ land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
