<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h2>
				<p>The talk of Vasco da Gama with the King of Melinde, wherein he describeth Europe, and recounteth the origin of the kingdom of Portugal, its kings (including the King Dom Fernando) and its principal achievements: The notable feat of Egás Moníz: The Queen of Castile, Dona Maria, visiteth Portugal to crave aid for the Battle of the Salado: The loves and luckless fate of Dona Ignéz de Castro: Some events which befell the King Dom Fernando.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>Populous Europe passeth in review;</td>
							<td>(6⁠–⁠23)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Egás Moníz is praised for famous feat;</td>
							<td>(35⁠–⁠41)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>What Kings and wars our Lusitania knew;</td>
							<td>(24⁠–⁠34)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Afonso sees the <strong>Christ</strong> on Cross elate;</td>
							<td>(42⁠–⁠46)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Agnes de Castro’s breast of snowy hue</td>
							<td rowspan="2">(118⁠–⁠135)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>With innocent blood empurpleth popular hate:</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Fernando’s vile neglect is shown to shame,</td>
							<td rowspan="2">(138⁠–⁠143)</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>And the high pow’ers that youth and beauty claim.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-3-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now, my Calliope! to teach incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what speech great Gama for the King did frame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Inspire immortal song, grant voice divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unto this mortal who so loves thy name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus may the God whose gift was Medicine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to whom thou barest Orpheus, lovely Dame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>never for Daphne, Clytia, Leucothöe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>due love deny thee or inconstant grow he.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Satisfy, Nymph! desires that in me teem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to sing the merits of thy Lusians brave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so worlds shall see and say that Tagus-stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rolls Aganippe’s liquor. Leave, I crave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">leave flow’ry Pindus-head; e’en now I deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Apollo bathes me in that sovran wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>else must I hold it, that thy gentle sprite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>fears thy dear Orpheus fade through me from sight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All stood with open ears in long array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to hear what mighty Gama mote unfold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when, past in thoughtful mood a brief delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">began he thus with brow high-raised and bold:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Thou biddest me, O King! to say my say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">anent our grand genealogy of old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou bidd’st me not relate an alien story;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thou bidd’st me laud my brother Lusians’ glory.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“That one praise others’ exploits and renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is honour’d custom which we all desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet fear I ’tis unfit to praise mine own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lest praise, like this suspect, no trust inspire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor may I hope to make all matters known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Time however long were short: yet, sire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as thou commandest all is owed to thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>maugre my will I speak and brief will be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, more, what most obligeth me, in fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is that no leasing in my tale may dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for of such Feats whatever boast be mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when most is told, remaineth much to tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But that due order wait on the design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en as desirest thou to learn full well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the wide-spread Cont’inent first I’ll briefly trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>then the fierce bloody wars that waged my Race.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Atwixt the Zone, where Cancer holds command⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the lucent Sun’s septentrional mete⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and that whose frigid horrors freeze the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as burns the middle Belt with fervid heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lies haughty Europe: On her goodly strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">facing Arcturus and the Ponent, beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the briny billows of Atlantis plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while free t’wards Auster flows the Midland-main.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“That part where lovely Dawn is born and bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">neighboureth Asia: But the curvèd river,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from far and frore Rhipaean ranges shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to feed Maeotis-lake with waves that shiver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">departs them, and the Sea-strait fierce and dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that owned the vict’ory of the Greek deceiver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where now the seaman sees along the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>triumphant Troja’s mem’ories and⁠—no more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There farther still the Boreal Pole below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hyperboréan mountain-walls appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and the wild hills where Aeolus loves to blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while of his winds the names they proudly bear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here such cold comfort doth Apollo show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so weak his light and warmth to shine and cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that snows eternal gleam upon the mountains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>freezeth the sea, and ever freeze the fountains.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here of the Scythic hordes vast numbers be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in olden day a mighty warrior band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who fought for honours of antiquity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the then owners of the Nylus-land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But how remote their claims from verity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(for human judgments oft misunderstand),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>let him who seeks what higher lore reveal’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ask the red clay that clothes Damascus-field.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now in these wild and wayward parts be told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cold Lapland’s name, uncultivate Norwày,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Escandinavia’s isle, whose scions bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">boast triumphs Italy shall ne’er gainsay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here, while ne frost, ne wintry rigours hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in hand the waters, seafolk ply the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>over the arm of rough Sarmatic Main</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Swede, the Brusian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> and the shiv’ering Dane.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Between the sea and Tanaïs-stream we count</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">strange races, Ruthens,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> Moscows, and Livonians⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sarmátae all of old⁠—and on the Mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hercynian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> Marcomanni, now Polonians.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Holding the empire Almayne paramount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dwell Saxons, and Bohemians, and Pannonians;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and other tribes, wherethrough their currents frore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rhine, Danube, Amasis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> and Albis pour.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Twixt distant Ister and the famous Strait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where hapless Helle left her name and life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Thracians wone, a folk of brave estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Mars’ well-loved country, chosen home of strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There Rhódope and Haemus rue the weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of cursèd Othman’s rule with horror rife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Byzance they hold beneath their yoke indign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>great injury working to great Constantine!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Hard by their side the Macedonians rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose soil is water’ed by cold Axius’ wave:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Eke ye, of ev’ery choicest realm the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lands of the free, the wise, the good, the brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that here did breed and bear the facund breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and to the world its wit and wisdom gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherewith thou, noble Greece! hast reach’ed the stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no less by arts exalt than arms and wars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The Dalmats follow; and upon the Bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where rose Antenor’s walls<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> in while of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">superb Venetia builds on wat’ery way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Adria’s Queen that erst was lowly poor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hence seawards runs a land-arm made to sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">forceful the sons of many a stranger shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>an arm of might, whose Race hath conquer’d time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor less by spirit than by sword sublime.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Girdeth her shores the kingdom Neptunine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while Nature’s bulwarks fence her landward side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her middle width departeth Apennine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Mars, her saint and patron, glorified:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But when the Porter rose to rank divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she lost her prowess, and her bellic pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humbled she lies with antique puissance spent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Man’s humil’ity may his God content!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Gallia can there be seen, whose name hath flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Caesar’s triumphs to the world are told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Séquana<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a> ’tis watered and the Rhone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Rhine’s deep current and Garumna<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> cold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here rise the ranges from Pyréne known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Nymph ensepulchre’d in days of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whence, legends say, the conflagrated woods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>rolled golden streams, and flowèd silvern floods.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo! here her presence showeth noble Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Europe’s body corporal the head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er whose home-rule, and glorious foreign reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fatal Wheel so many a whirl hath made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet ne’er her Past or force or fraud shall stain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor restless Fortune shall her name degrade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no bonds her bellic offspring bind so tight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but it shall burst them with its force of sprite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There, facing Tingitania’s shore, she seemeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to block and bar the Med’iterranean wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where the known Strait its name ennobled deemeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the last labour of the Theban Brave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Big with the burden of her tribes she teemeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">circled by whelming waves that rage and rave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all noble races of such valiant breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that each may justly boast itself the best.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Hers the Tarragonese who, famed in war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">made aye-perturbed Parthenopé obey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the twain Asturias, and the haught Navarre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">twin Christian bulwarks on the Muslim way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hers the Gallego canny, and the rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Castilian, whom his star raised high to sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spain as her saviour, and his seign’iory feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baetis, Leon, Granáda, and Castile.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See the head-crowning coronet is she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of general Europe, Lusitania’s reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where endeth land and where beginneth sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Phoebus sinks to rest upon the main.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Willed her the Heavens with all-just decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by wars to mar th’ ignoble Mauritan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to cast him from herself: nor there consent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he rule in peace the Fiery Continent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This is my happy land, my home, my pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where, if the Heav’ens but grant the pray’er I pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for glad return and every risk defied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there may my life-light fail and fade away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This was the Lusitania, name applied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Lusus or by Lysa, sons, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of ancient Bacchus, or his boon compeers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>eke the first dwellers of her eldest years.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here sprang the Shepherd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> in whose name we see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">forecast of virile might, of virtuous meed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose fame no force shall ever hold in fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since fame of mighty Rome ne’er did the deed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This, by light Heaven’s volatile decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that ancient Scyther, who devours his seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>made puissant pow’er in many a part to claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>assuming regal rank; and thus it came:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“A King there was in Spain, Afonso hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who waged such warfare with the Saracen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that by his ’sanguined arms, and arts, and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he spoiled the lands and lives of many men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When from Hercùlean Calpè winged her flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his fame to Caucasus Mount and Caspian glen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>many a Knight, who noblesse coveteth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>comes off’ering service to such King and Death.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And with intrinsic love inflamèd more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for the True Faith, than honours popular,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they troopèd gath’ering from each distant shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">leaving their dear-loved homes and lands afar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When with high feats of force against the Moor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they proved of sing’ular worth in Holy War,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>willèd Afonso that their mighty deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>commens’urate gifts command and equal meeds.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Mid them Henrique, second son, men say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of a Hungarian King, well-known and tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by sort won Portugal which, in his day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne prizèd was ne had fit cause for pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His strong affection stronger to display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Spanish King decreed a princely bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his only child, Theresa, to the count;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and with her made him Seigneur Paramount.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This doughty Vassal from that servile horde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hagar the handmaid’s seed, great vict’ories won;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">reft the broad lands adjacent with his sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and did whatever Brav’ery bade be done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Him, for his exploits exc’ellent to reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">God gave in shortest space a gallant son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose arm to ’noble and enfame was fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the warlike name of Lusitania’s reign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Once more at home this conqu’ering Henry stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who sacred Hierosol’yma had relievèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his eyes had fed on Jordan’s holy flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which the Dear Body of Lord God had lavèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when Godfrey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> left no foe to be subdued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and all Judaea conquered was and savèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>many that in his wars had done devoir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to their own lordships took the way once more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But when this stout and gallant Hun attainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Life’s fatal period, age and travail-spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he gave, by Death’s necessity constrainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his sprite to Him who had that spirit lent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A son of tender years alone remainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to whom the Sire bequeath’d his ’bodiment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with bravest braves the youth was formed to cope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for from such sire such son the world may hope.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet old Report, I know not what its weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(for on such antique tale no man relies),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">saith that the Mother, tane in tow the state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a second nuptial bed did not despise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her orphan son to disinher’ited fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she doomed, declaring hers the dignities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>not his, with seigniory o’er all the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>her spousal dowry by her sire’s command.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now Prince Afonso (who such style had tane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in pious mem’ory of his Grandsire’s name)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeing no part and portion in his reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all pilled and plunder’d by the Spouse and Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by dour and doughty Mars inflamed amain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">privily plots his heritage to claim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He weighs the causes in his own conceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>till firm Resolve its fit effect shall greet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of Guimara’ens the field already flow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with floods of civil warfare’s bloody tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where she, who little of the Mother show’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to her own bowels love and land denied.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fronting the child in fight the parent stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor saw her depth of sin that soul of pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>against her God, against maternal love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sensual passion rose all pow’er above.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“O magical Medea! O Progne dire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if your own babes in vengeance dared ye kill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for alien crimes, and injuries of the sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">look ye, Teresa’s deed was darker still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Foul greed of gain, incontinent desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">were the main causes of such bitter ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scylla her agèd sire for one did slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for both Teresa did her son betray.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Right soon that noble Prince clear vict’ory won</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from his harsh Mother and her Fere indign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in briefest time the land obeyed the son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">though first to fight him did the folk incline.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But reft of reason and by rage undone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he bound the Mother in the biting chain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eftsoons avenged her griefs the hand of God:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such veneration is to parents owe’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo! the superb Castilian ’gins prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his pow’er to ’venge Teresa’s injuries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against the Lusian land in men so rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereon ne toil ne trouble heavy lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their breasts the cruel battle grandly dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">aid the good cause angelic Potencies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unrecking might unequal still they strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nay, more, their dreadful foe to flight they drive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Passeth no tedious time, before the great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Prince a dure Siege in Guimaraens dree’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by passing pow’er, for to ’mend his state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">came the fell en’emy, full of grief and greed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But when committed life to direful Fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Egas, the faithful guardian, he was free’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who had in any other way been lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all unpreparèd ’gainst such ’whelming host.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But when the loyal Vassal well hath known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how weak his Monarch’s arm to front such fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sans order wending to the Spanish fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his Sovran’s homage he doth pledge and plight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Straight from the horrid siege th’ invader flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">trusteth the word and honour of the Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Egas Moniz: But now the noble breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of the brave Youth disdaineth strange behest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Already came the plighted time and tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when the Castilian Don stood dight to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">before his pow’er the Prince bend low his pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yielding the promisèd obediency.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Egás who views his knightly word belied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while still Castile believes him true to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sweet life resolveth to the winds to throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor live with foulest taint of faithless vow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He with his children and his wife departeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to keep his promise with a faith immense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unshod and strippèd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a> while their plight imparteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far more of pity than of vengeance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘If, mighty Monarch! still thy spirit smarteth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to wreak revenge on my rash confidence,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>quoth he, ‘behold! I come with life to save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>my pledge, my knightly Honour’s word I gave.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘I bring, thou seest here, lives innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of wife, of sinless children dight to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if breasts of gen’erous mould and excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">accept such weaklings’ woeful destiny.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou se’est these hands, this tongue inconsequent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hereon alone the fierce exper’iment try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of torments, death, and doom that pass in full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sinis or e’en Perillus’ brazen bull.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“As shrifted wight the hangman stands before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in life still draining bitter draught of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lays throat on block, and of all hope forlore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">expects the blighting blow with bated breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So, in the Prince’s presence angry sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Egás stood firm to keep his plighted faith:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the King, marv’elling at such wondrous truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>feels anger melt and merge in Royal ruth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh the great Portingall-fidelity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Vassal self-devote to doom so dread!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What did the Persian more for loyalty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose gallant hand his face and nostrils shred?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When great Darius mourned so grievously</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that he a thousand times deep-sighing said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>far he prefer’d his Zóp’yrus sound again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>than lord of twenty Babylons to reign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But Prince Afonso now prepared his band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of happy Lusians proud to front the foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those haughty Moors that held the glorious land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yon side where clear delicious Tagus flows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now on Ourique<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> field was pitched and plan’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Royal ’Campment fierce and bellicose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>facing the hostile host of Sarrasin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>though there so many, here so few there bin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Confident, yet would he in nought confide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">save in his God that holds of Heav’en the throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so few baptizèd stood their King beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there were an hundred Moors for every one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Judge any sober judgment, and decide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’twas deed of rashness or by brav’ery done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to fall on forces whose exceeding might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a cent’ury showèd to a single Knight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Order five Moorish Kings the hostile host</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of whom Ismár,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> so called, command doth claim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all of long Warfare large experience boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein may mortals win immortal fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And gallant dames the Knights they love the most</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’company, like that brave and beauteous Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who to beleaguer’d Troy such aidance gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with woman-troops that drained Thermòdon’s wave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The coolth serene, and early morning’s pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">now paled the sparkling stars about the Pole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when Mary’s Son appearing crucified</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in vision, strengthened King Afonso’s soul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But he, adoring such appearance, cried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fired with a frenzied faith beyond control:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘To th’ Infidel, O Lord! to th’ Infidel:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not, Lord, to me who know Thy pow’er so well.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Such gracious marvel in such manner sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’flamèd the Lusians’ spirits fierce and high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">towards their nat’ural King, that excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Prince, unto whom love-boon none could deny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Aligned to front the foeman prepotent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they shouted res’onant slogan to the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and fierce the ’larum rose, ‘Real, real,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for high Afonso, King of Portugal!’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“As to the fight by calls defied and cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">some fierce Molossan on the wooded height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">attacks the rampant Bull, who most relies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on strength of tem’erous horn to force the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now nips the ear, then at the side he flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">barking, with more of nimbleness than might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>till ripped at last the gullet of his foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he lays the mighty bulk of monster low:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“So the new King, inflamed with zeal devout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for God nor less for faithful Lieges’ sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">assails by cunning skill the barb’arous rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with Braves the fronting phalanx eath to break:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Whereat the ban-dogs ‘Allah! Allah!’ shout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and fly to arms; our raging warriors shake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the lance and bow; resound the trumpet tones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the music thunders; Echo moans and groans.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“E’en as the prairie-fire enkindled on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sun-parchèd steppe (as winn’oweth upper air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sibilant Boreas), by the blasts swift blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er bush and arid brake rains flame and flare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The shepherd lads and lasses, idly strown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in rest and gentle slumber, waked by blare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of crackling conflagration blazing higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hamlet-wards force their flocks to fly the fire:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Th’ astonied Moorman in such startled guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">snatcheth his weapon hast’ily and sans heed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet he awaits the fight, nor ever flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nay, spurs his battle-ginnet to its speed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Meet him as rash and swift his enemies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose piercing lances gar his bosom bleed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These fall half-slain, while others flee that can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>convoking aidance of their Alcoran.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There may be viewèd ’counters madly rash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">onsets no Serra’s sturdy strength could stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while charging here and there the chargers dash⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the gifts of Neptune smiting gravid Land:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Buffets they deal, and blows that bash and smash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">burneth and blazeth Warfare’s blasting brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but he of Lusus coat, mail, plate of steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hacks, hews, breaks, batters, rives and rends piecemeal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Men’s heads like bullets dance the bloody plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ownerless arms and legs insens’ible lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and quiv’ering entrails tell of mortal pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and faces fade and life’s fair colours fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lost is that impious host, whose heapèd slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">roll o’er the green’ery rills of crimson dye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whereby the grasses lose their white and green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and nought but glow of crimson gore is seen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But now the Lusian victor held the field</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his trophies gath’ering, and his gorgeous prey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The crusht Hispanian Moor was forced to yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while on the plain three days the great King lay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And now he chargeth on his virgin shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what still assures this well-won Vict’ory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>five noble inescutcheons azure-hued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>signing the Moorish Five his sword subdued.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He paints with bezants five each ’scutcheon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the thirty silvers wherewith God was sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and various tinctures make His mem’ory known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose grace and favour did his cause uphold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Painted on every cinque a cinque is shown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, that the thirty may be fully told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>counteth for two the one that central lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of the five azures painted crossy-wise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Some time has passèd, since this gain had past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of goodly battail, when the high King hies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to take Leiría, lately tane and last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">conquest that boast our conquer’d enemies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Herewith Arronches castled strong and fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is jointly gainèd with the noble prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scalabicastro,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a> whose fair fields amene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thou, crystal Tagus! bathest all serene.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Unto this conquered roll of towns his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">eke addeth Mafra won in shortest space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and in the Mountains which the Moon hath hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he clasps frore Cintra to his hard embrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cintra, whose Naiads love to hide their light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by hidden founts and fly the honey’d lace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which Love hath woven ’mid the hills where flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the waters flaming with a living lowe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And thou, O noble Lisbon! thou encrown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Princess elect of Cities capital,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rear’d by the facund Rover-King renown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose wiles laid low Dardania’s burning wall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, whose commands oblige the Sea’s Profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wast taught to bear the Lusitanian’s thrall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>aided by potent navies at what time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they came crusading from the Boreal clime.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Beyond Germanic Albis and the Rhene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from Britannia’s misty margin sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to waste and slay the people Sarracene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">many had sailed on holy thoughts intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now gained the Tagus-mouth, our stream amene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to great Afonso’s royal camp they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose lofty fame did thence the Heav’ens invade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and siege to Ulysséa’s walls they laid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Five sequent times her front had Luna veilèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">five times her lovely face in full had shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when oped her gate the City, which availèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no Force ’gainst ’sieging forces round her thrown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Right bloody was th’ assault and fierce th’ assailèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en as their stubborn purpose bound them down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>asp’erous the Victor, ready all to dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Vanquisht, victims of a dire despair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus won she yielded and, in fine, she lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">prostrate that City which, in days of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the mighty meiny never would obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of frigid Scythia’s hordes immanely bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who could so far extend their savage sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till Ebro saw ’t, and Tagus trembling roll’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and some o’er Baetis-land, in short, so swept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that was the region Vandalía ’clept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“What might of city could perchance endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">prowess which proud Lisbóa might not bear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who mote resist the powers dure and dour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of men, whose Fame from earth invadeth air?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now yield obedience all Estremadure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Obidos, Torres Vedras, Alemquer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where softly plash the music-murmuring waves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’mid rocks and reefs whose feet the torrent laves.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Eke ye, Transtagan lands! ye justly vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of flavous Ceres’ bien and bonny boon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yielded to might above the might of men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the walls and castles by his valour won:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, too, Moor-yeoman! hopest hope insane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those riant regions long as lord to own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for Elvas, Moura, Serpa, well-known sites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with Alcacer-do-Sal must yield their rights.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The noble City and sure seat behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">held by Sertorius, rebel famed whilòme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where now the nitid silv’ery waters cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">brought from afar to bless the land and home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’erflow the royal arches hundredfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose noble sequence streaks the dark-blue dome;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>not less succumb’d she to her bold pursuer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to Giraldó, entitled ‘Knight Sans Peur.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Fast towards Beja city, vengeful prest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to slake his wrath for spoilt Trancoso’s wrong,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Afonso, who despiseth gentle rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and would brief human life by Fame prolong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Feebly resisteth him and his behest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the City, falling to his arms ere long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and nought of life within her walls but feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the raging victor’s edge of merciless steel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With these Palmella yielded to the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">piscous Cezimbra, eke, her finny spoils;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then, aided onwards by his fortunate star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the King a pow’erful force of foemen foils:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Felt it the City, saw ’t her Lord afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who to support and aid her spares no toils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>along the hill-skirt marching all unware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of rash encounter lackt he heed and care.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The King of Bad’ajoz was a Muslim bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with horse four thousand, fierce and furious Knights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and countless Peons, armed and dight with gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose polisht surface glanceth lustrous light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But as a savage Bull on lonely wold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom jealous rage in hot May-month incites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sighting a stranger, mad with love and wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the brute blind lover chargeth down the path:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“So doth Afonso, sudden seen the foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that urge their forward march securely brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">strike, slay, and scatter, raining doughty blows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">flies the Moor King, who recks but self to save:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Naught save a panick fear his spirit knows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his foll’owers eke to follow only crave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while ours, who struck a stroke so sore, so fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>were sixty horsemen told in fullest tale.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Victory swift pursuing, rest disdaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the great untiring King; he must’ereth all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the lieges of his land, whom nought restraineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from ever seeking stranger realms to ’thrall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He wends to ’leaguer Bad’ajoz, where he gaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his soul’s desire, and battleth at her fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with force so fierce, and art and heart so true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his deeds made others fain to dare and do.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But the high Godhead, who when man offends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so long deservèd penalties delays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">waiting at times to see him make amends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or for deep myst’ery hid from man’s dull gaze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if He our valiant King till now defends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from dangers, facèd fast as foes can raise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lends aid no longer, when for vengeance cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Mother’s curses who in prison lies;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For in the City which he compast round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">encompast by the Leoneze was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">because his conquests trespasst on their ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which of Leon and not of Port’ugale be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here was his stubborn will right costly found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as happeth oft in human history,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>an iron maims his legs, as rage-inflamèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to fight he flies and falls a captive maimèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“O famous Pompey! feel thy Wraith no pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to see the fate of noble feats like thine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor mourn if all-just Nemesis ordain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy bays be torn by sire-in-law indign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">though Phasis frore and parcht Syéné-plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose perpendic’ular shadows ne’er decline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bootes’ ice-bergs, and Equator-fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>confess the terrors which thy name inspires;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Tho’ rich Arabia, and the brood ferocious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Heniochs, with Colchis-region known of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Golden Fleece; and though the Cappadoces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Júdeans who One only God adore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">tho’ soft Sophénes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a> and the race atrocious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cilician, with Armenia whence outpour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the twain of mighty streams, whose farthest fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hides in a higher and a holier Mount;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And though, in fine, from far Atlantic tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">E’en to the Taurus, Scythia’s tow’ering wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all saw thee conquer; fearless still abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if none save Emath-field beheld thee fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou shalt behold Afonso’s ovant pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lie subjugate, that subjugated all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such fate Celestial Counsel long foresaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thine from a sire, his from a son-in-law.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Returned the King sublime, in fine, with sprite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the just doom of Judge divine chastisèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and when of Santarem in pride of might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Saracen a bootless siege devisèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and when of Vincent, martyr benedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the precious Corse by Christian people prizèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from Sacrum Promontorium<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> was conveyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and reverent-wise in Ulysséa laid:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Faster to push the projects still in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the toil-spent Father sent his stout young son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bidding him pass to Alemtejo’s land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with warlike gear and soldiers many a one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sancho, a sov’ereign wielder of the brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">straight forward passing, gore-red gars to run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the stream<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> whose waters feed Seville and flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>dyed by the brutish Moormen’s barb’rous blood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With hunger whetted by this new success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">now resteth not the Youth till sight his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">another slaughter, sore as this, oppress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the barb’rous host that circling Beja lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Not long the Prince whom fortune loves to bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">waits the fair end where leads his dear emprize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now the routed Moors to vengeance cleave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their only hope such losses to retrieve.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“They crowd the mighty Mount whereof Meduse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">robbèd his body who the skies upbore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They flock in thousands from Cape Ampeluse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from Tangier, Antaeus’ seat of yore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Abyla’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a> dweller offereth scant excuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who with his weapon hasteth him the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when heard the Moorish clarions shrilly-tonèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and all the reign high Juba whilom ownèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<br/>
					<span>“The Mir-almuminin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> who led the throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from the Dark Cont’inent past to Portugal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thirteen Moor kings he led, high, haught, and strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to his Imperial sceptre subject all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus wreaking forceful every tyrant Wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherever easy Wrong mote sate his gall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sancho in Santarem he flies t’ invest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yet his was hardly of success the best.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Gives asp’erous battle, fighting fury-fraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the hateful Moor a thousand feints designing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne horrid catapult avails him aught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne forceful batt’ering-ram, ne hidden mining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Afonso’s son, conserving force and thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and firm resolve with warlike skill combining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>foreseeth all with prudent heart and art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and stern resistance brings to every part.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But now the Vet’ran⁠—doomed by years to ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and gentle rest, from life of toil and teen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">be’ing in the city,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> down whose pastured leas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Mondego’s wavelets kiss the hem of green;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when learnt how close his son beleaguer’d is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in Santarem by Moormen blind with spleen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>close from the City flies the fone to meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>age-idlesse spurning with fast eager feet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He heads his army, tried in war and known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his son to succour; and his well-led host</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shows wonted Port’ingall-fury all their own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till in brief time the Moor is broke and lost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Battle-plain⁠—whose blood-stained front is strown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with steely coats, and caps of varied cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>horse, charger, harness, rich and worthy prize⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>heaped with their owners’ mangled corpses lies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Forth fares the remnant of the Paynimry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from Lusitania, hurled in headlong flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But Mir-almuminin may never flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for ere he flee his life hath fled the light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To Him whose arm vouchsafed such Victory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in praise and stintless prayer our hosts unite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chances so passing strange make clear to ken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s arm smites sorer than all arms of men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Such crown of conquest still bedeckt the brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of old Afonso, Lord of lofty fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when he, in fine, who ever foiled his foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was foiled by ancient Time’s unyielding claim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Past the death-sickness o’er his pallid brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">its frigid hand, and wrung his feeble frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thus the debt on mortal shoulders laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his years to gloomy Libitína paid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“His loss the lofty Promontories mourn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from the wavy rivers floods of grief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with lakelets overspread the fieldèd corn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and trickling tears are sorrow’s sole relief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But ring so loud o’er Earth’s extremest bourne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fame and exploits of our great lost chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that evermore shall Echo for his reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Afonso! Afonso!’ cry, and cry in vain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Sancho, his lusty son, the worthy heir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of his great Father’s valour, force and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as did his early doings clear declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when Baetis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> fled ensanguin’d from the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from Andalusía forced to fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the barb’arous King and peoples Ishmaelite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and more, when they who vainly Beja girt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of his shrewd blows themselves had borne the hurt:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“After he had been raised to Royal hest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and held for years a few his father’s land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he wends the city Sylves to invest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">plowèd whose plain the barb’arous peasant’s hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With allies val’orous was his daring blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the sturdy Germans, whose Armada man’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by furnisht host was flying o’er the wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the lost Judaea to regain and save.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To join in holy enterprise they went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Red Frederick, who did first to move begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his mighty armament and succour sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to ward the town where <strong>Christ</strong> had died for men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When Guy, whose Croisers were by thirst bespent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yielded his sword to gallant Saladin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>there, where the Muslim host was well supplied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with wat’ery store to those of Guy denied.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-88">
				<header>
					<p>88</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But that majestical Armade that came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by dint of storm-wind o’er the Lisbon bar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">would aid our Sancho the foul foe to tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all being bounden for the Holy War:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As to his Father, happed to him the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Lisbon fell to fortunes similar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>aided by Germans, Sylves town he takes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and the fierce dweller slays or subject makes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-89">
				<header>
					<p>89</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And if so many trophies from Mahound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his valour snatchèd, eke denies his pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Leoneze in peace to till their ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom Mart with martial usage loved to guide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till on the bended neck his yoke he bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of haughty Túi and all its country-side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where many a city felt the dreaded blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which with thine arms thou, Sancho! broughtest low.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-90">
				<header>
					<p>90</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But ’mid his many palms this Prince waylaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the stroke of tem’erous Death; his heir prefer’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was that esteemèd son whom all obey’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">second Afonso, of our Kings the third.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He reigning, Alcacér-do-Sal was made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ours, snatcht for ever from the Moorish herd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that erst was taken by the Moor beset,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and now parforce he pays of Death the Debt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-91">
				<header>
					<p>91</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Afonso dying, straight to him succeedeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a second Sancho, easy-going soul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who in his weakling idlesse so exceedeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the rulèd rule their ruler and their tool:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He lost the Reign, for which another pleadeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by private preference deprived of rule;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>since, govern’d only by his minions’ will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he made him partner in their works of ill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-92">
				<header>
					<p>92</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet ne’er was Sancho, no, such profl’igate pest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as was that Nero wedded with a boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who in foul incest showing horrid zest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his mother Agrippina dared enjoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ne’er with strange cruel arts did he molest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the liege, nor gar’d the torch his town destroy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he was no waster, no Heliogabálus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>no woman-king like soft Sardanapálus.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-93">
				<header>
					<p>93</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne’er was his tyr’annised people so chastisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as wretched Sicill by her tyrant bane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne like the despot Phálaris, he devisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">novel inventions for inhuman pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But his high-hearted realm, which ever prizèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lords of the highest hopes and sovran strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>would ne’er whole-soulèd such a King obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who showed not fittest for the kingly sway.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-94">
				<header>
					<p>94</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Hence came the gov’ernance of the reign to right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the County Bolognese; and he arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">at length to kingship, when from life took flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his brother Sancho sunk in soft repose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This, whom the ‘Brave Afonso’ subjects hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when fenced his kingdom from internal foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>strives to dilate it; what his Sire possest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is worlds too narrow for so big a breast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-95">
				<header>
					<p>95</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of both Algarves, given to his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in gift of bridal dowry, greater part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his arm recovers, and outdrives the band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Moors ill-treated now by hostile Mart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He freed and made the Mistress of her Land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Lusitania, such his bellic art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>till final ruin whelmed the mighty hordes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where’er Earth ownèd Lusus’ subjects lords.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-96">
				<header>
					<p>96</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See, next that Diniz comes in whom is seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the ‘brave Afonso’s’ offspring true and digne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereby the mighty boast obscurèd been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the vaunt of lib’eral Alexander’s line:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beneath his sceptre blooms the land serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(already compast golden Peace divine)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with constitution, customs, laws and rights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a tranquil country’s best and brightest lights.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-97">
				<header>
					<p>97</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The first was he who made Coimbra own</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pallas-Minerva’s gen’erous exercise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he called the Muses’ choir from Helicon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to tread the lea that by Mondego lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Whate’er of good whilere hath Athens done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">here proud Apollo keepeth ev’ery prize:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here gives he garlands wove with golden ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with perfumed Nard and ever-verdant Bay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-98">
				<header>
					<p>98</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Brave towns and cities reared his hand anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">stout fortalice, and strongly-castled mure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while his well-nigh reformèd kingdom grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with stalwart towers and lofty walls secure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But when dure Atropos cut short the clew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and shore the thin-spun thread of life mature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>arose, to filial duty nidering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the fourth Afonso, yet a brave good King.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-99">
				<header>
					<p>99</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This proud Castile’s bravades with equal pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">despised, of soul and breast serenely grand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for aye the Lusitanian’s sprite defied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fear of the strongest, though the smaller band:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But when the Mauritanian races hied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to win and wear Hesperia’s winsome land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and marchèd boldly to debel Castile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>superb Afonso went to work her weal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-100">
				<header>
					<p>100</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne’er did Semiramis such myriads see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who o’er the wide Hydaspick prairie trod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor Attila⁠—who daunteth Italy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with dreadful boast, self-titled ‘Scourge of God,’⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hurried such Gothick hosts to victory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as the wild Saracens’ stupendous crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with all th’ excessive might Granáda yields</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that flockt to battle on Tartessus’ fields.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-101">
				<header>
					<p>101</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“When saw Castilia’s monarch, high and haught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such force inexpugnable fain of strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dreading lest all Hispania come to naught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">once lost ere this,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> far more than loss of life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">aid of our Lusian chivalry he sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and sent the summons by his dearest wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his spouse who sends her, and the joy and pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of the fond Father to whose realm she hied.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-102">
				<header>
					<p>102</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Enter’d Maria, fairest of the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her Father’s palace-halls of tow’ering height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lovely her gest though joy was crusht by care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that brimmed her beauteous eyes with tears that blight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and waved her glorious wealth of golden hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er neck and shoulders iv’ory-smooth and white:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before her gladly-greeting Sire she stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and told her mission in this melting mood:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-103">
				<header>
					<p>103</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Whatever various races Earth hath borne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fierce strange peoples of all Africk-land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">leadeth Marocco’s mighty Monarch, sworn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our noble Spain to conquer and command:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Power like this ne’er met beneath the Morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since bitter Ocean learnt to bathe the strand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bring such fierceness and a rage so dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Living shake and quake the buried Dead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-104">
				<header>
					<p>104</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘He to whose arms thou gavest me to wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his land defending when such foes invade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">offers himself, o’erfeeble for the strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to the hard mercies of the Moorish blade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if, Sire! thou deign not aid that all-dear life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">me shalt thou see from out the kingdom fade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>widowèd, wretched, doomed to lot obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sans realm, sans husband, e’en sans life secure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-105">
				<header>
					<p>105</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Wherefore, O King! of whom for purest fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Mulucha’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> currents in their course congeal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">cast from thee dull delay, rise, swift appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a second Saviour to our sad Castile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If this thy count’enance, beaming love so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">set on a Father’s fond proud heart its seal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>haste, Father! succour, an thou hasten not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>haply he faileth who thy succour sought.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-106">
				<header>
					<p>106</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Not otherwise fear-filled Maria spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her Sire, than Venus when, in saddest strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she pled to great All-Father for the sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of her Aeneas tossing on the Main;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and in Jove’s breast could such compassion ’wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his dreadful thunders from his hand fall vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clement Godhead all to her concedeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and mourneth only that no more she needeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-107">
				<header>
					<p>107</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But now the squadded warriors muster dense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on Eborensian plains with fierce array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">glint in the sun-glare harness, sword, spear, lance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and richly furnisht destriers prance and neigh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The banner’d trumpets with a blast advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rousing men’s bosoms from the gentle sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of holy Peace to dire refulgent arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and down the dales reverb’erate War’s alarms.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-108">
				<header>
					<p>108</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Majestic marcheth, girt by all his powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">th’ insignia of his Royal state among,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">valiant Afonso, and his tall form towers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by neck and shoulders taller than the throng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his gest alone embraves the heart that cowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in his stout presence wax the weaklings strong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to Castilia’s realm he leads his band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with his fair daughter, Ladye of the Land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-109">
				<header>
					<p>109</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In fine when met the Kings, Afonsos twain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon Tarifa’s field, they stand to front</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that swarming host of stone-blind heathen men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for whom are small the meadows and the mount.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No sprite there liveth of so tough a grain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but feels its faith and trust of small account,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>did it not clearly see and fully know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><strong>Christ</strong> by His servants’ arms shall smite the foe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-110">
				<header>
					<p>110</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The seed of Hagar laughing, as it were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to view the Christian pow’er so weak, so mean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">begins the lands, as though their own, to share</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ere won, among the conqu’ering Hagarene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such forgèd title and false style they bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">claiming the famous name of Saracene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus with false reck’oning would they strip and spoil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>calling it theirs, that noble alien soil.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-111">
				<header>
					<p>111</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“E’en so the barb’arous Giant huge and gaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with cause to royal Saul so dread appearing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when seen the swordless Shepherd stand afront,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">armed but with pebbles and with heart unfearing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">launchèd his sneer of pride and arr’ogant taunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">at the weak youngling’s humble raiment jeering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who, whirled the sling, soon read the lesson well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>how much shall Faith all human force excel:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-112">
				<header>
					<p>112</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus do the Moormen, traitor-souls, despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Christian forces, nor can understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how Heav’en’s high fortress wonted aid affies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which e’en horrific Hell may not withstand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On this and on his skill Castile relies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">falls on Marocco’s King, strikes hand to hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Portingall, who holds all danger light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>makes the Granádan kingdom fear his might.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-113">
				<header>
					<p>113</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold! the brandisht blade and lance at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rang loud on coat and crest, a wild onsèt!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They cried, as each his several law confest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">these ‘Sanct’ Thiago!’ and those ‘Mahomet!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The cries of wounded men the skies opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose flowing blood in ugly puddles met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where other half-slain wretches drowning lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who dragged their shatter’d limbs from out the fray.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-114">
				<header>
					<p>114</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With such prevailing force the Lusian fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Gránadil, that in the shortest space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">an utter ruin of his host was wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne fence, ne steely plate our strokes could face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With such triumphant Vict’ory cheaply bought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unsatisfied, the Strong Arm<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> flies apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and timely aids Castilia’s toiling pow’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>still mixt in doubtful conflict with the Moor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-115">
				<header>
					<p>115</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now brightly burning Sol had housed his wain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in Thetis’ bower, and his slanting ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sank westward, bearing Hesper in his train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to close that rare and most memorious day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When of the Moors those valiant Sovrans twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the dense and dreadful squadrons swept away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with such fell slaughter as ne’er told of Man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the page of Story since the world began.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-116">
				<header>
					<p>116</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne’er could strong Marius e’en the quarter show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of lives here victim’d by victorious Fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when to the river, red with gory glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he sent his thirsty Braves their drouth to sate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ne yet the Carthaginian, asp’erous foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to Roman pow’er and cradled in her hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when slain so many Knights of noble Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of their gold rings he sent three bushels home.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-117">
				<header>
					<p>117</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And if sole thou so many souls to flit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">couldst force, and seek Cocytus’ reign of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when thou the Holy City didst acquit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the base Júdean, firm in olden rite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’twas that Jehovah’s vengeance thus saw fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O noble Titus! not thine arm of might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for thus inspirèd men had prophesied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thus by <strong>Jesu’s</strong> lips ’twas certified.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-118">
				<header>
					<p>118</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Accomplishèd his act of arms victorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">home to his Lusian realm Afonso sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to gain from Peace-tide triumphs great and glorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as those he gained in wars and battles dread;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when the sad chance, on History’s page memorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which can unsepulchre the sheeted dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>befell that ill-starr’d miserable Dame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who, foully slain, a thronèd Queen became.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-119">
				<header>
					<p>119</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou, only thou, pure Love, whose cruel might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">obligeth human hearts to weal and woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou, only thou, didst wreak such foul despight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as though she were some foul perfidious foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thy burning thirst, fierce Love, they say aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">may not be quencht by saddest tears that flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nay, more, thy sprite of harsh tyrannick mood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>would see thine altars bathed with human blood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-120">
				<header>
					<p>120</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He placed thee, fair Ignèz! in soft retreat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">culling the first-fruits of thy sweet young years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in that delicious Dream, that dear Deceit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose long endurance Fortune hates and fears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hard by Mondego’s yearned-for meads thy seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where linger, flowing still, those lovely tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>until each hill-born tree and shrub confest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the name of Him deep writ within thy breast.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-121">
				<header>
					<p>121</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There, in thy Prince awoke responsive-wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dear thoughts of thee which soul-deep ever lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which brought thy beauteous form before his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whene’er those eyne of thine were far away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Night fled in falsest, sweetest fantasies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in fleeting, flying reveries sped the Day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and all, in fine, he saw or cared to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>were memories of his love, his joys, his thee.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-122">
				<header>
					<p>122</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of many a dainty dame and damosel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the coveted nuptial couches he rejecteth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for nought can e’er, pure Love! thy care dispel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when one enchanting shape thy heart subjecteth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These whims of passion to despair compel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Sire, whose old man’s wisdom aye respecteth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his subjects murmuring at his son’s delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to bless the nation with a bridal day.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-123">
				<header>
					<p>123</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To wrench Ignèz from life he doth design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">better his captured son from her to wrench;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">deeming that only blood of death indign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the living lowe of such true Love can quench.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What Fury willed it that the steel so fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which from the mighty weight would never flinch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of the dread Moorman, should be drawn in hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to work that hapless delicate Ladye’s fate?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-124">
				<header>
					<p>124</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The horr’ible Hangmen hurried her before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the King, now moved to spare her innocence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but still her cruel murther urged the more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the People swayed by fierce and false pretence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She with her pleadings pitiful and sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that told her sorrows and her care immense</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for her Prince-spouse and babes, whom more to leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>than her own death the mother’s heart did grieve:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-125">
				<header>
					<p>125</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And heav’enwards to the clear and chryst’alline skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">raising her eyne with piteous tears bestainèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her eyne, because her hands with cruel ties</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">one of the wicked Ministers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> constrainèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And gazing on her babes in wistful guise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose pretty forms she loved with love unfeignèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose orphan’d lot the Mother filled with dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unto their cruel grandsire thus she said⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-126">
				<header>
					<p>126</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘If the brute-creatures, which from natal day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on cruel ways by Nature’s will were bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or feral birds whose only thought is prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon aerial rapine all intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if men such salvage be’ings have seen display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to little children loving sentiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>e’en as to Ninus’ mother did befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and to the twain who rear’d the Roman wall:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-127">
				<header>
					<p>127</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O thou, who bear’st of man the gest and breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(an it be manlike thus to draw the sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on a weak girl, because her love imprest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his heart, who took her heart and love in ward);</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">respect for these her babes preserve, at least!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since it may not her òbscure death retard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moved be thy pitying soul for them and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>although my faultless fault unmoved thou see!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-128">
				<header>
					<p>128</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘And if thou know’est to deal in direful fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the doom of brand and blade to Moorish host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">know also thou to deal of life the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to one who ne’er deserved her life be lost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But an thou wouldst mine inn’ocence thus requite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">place me for aye on sad exilèd coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in Scythian sleet, on seething Libyan shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with life-long tears to linger evermore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-129">
				<header>
					<p>129</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Place me where beasts with fiercest rage abound⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lyons and Tygers⁠—there, ah! let me find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if in their hearts of flint be pity found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">denied to me by heart of humankind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There with intrinsic love and will so fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for him whose love is death, there will I tend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>these tender pledges whom thou see’st; and so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall the sad mother cool her burning woe.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-130">
				<header>
					<p>130</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Inclin’ed to pardon her the King benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">moved by this sad lament to melting mood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but the rude People and Fate’s dure design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(that willed it thus) refused the pardon sued:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They draw their swords of steely temper fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they who proclaim as just such deed of blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against a ladye, caitiff, felon wights!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>how showed ye here, brute beasts or noble knights?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-131">
				<header>
					<p>131</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus on Polyxena, that beauteous maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">last solace of her mother’s age and care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when doom’d to die by fierce Achilles’ shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the cruel Pyrrhus hasted brand to bare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But she (a patient lamb by death waylaid),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the calm glances which serene the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>casts on her mother, mad with grief, her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and silent waits that awesome sacrifice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-132">
				<header>
					<p>132</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus dealt with fair Ignèz the murth’erous crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in th’ alabastrine neck that did sustain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the charms whereby could Love the love subdue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of him, who crown’d her after death his Queen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bathing their blades; the flow’ers of snowy hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which often water’ed by her eyne had been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>are blood-dyed; and they burn with blinding hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>reckless of tortures stor’d for them by Fate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-133">
				<header>
					<p>133</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Well mightest shorn of rays, O Sun! appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to fiends like these on day so dark and dire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as when Thyestes ate the meats that were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his seed, whom Atreus slew to spite their sire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And you, O hollow Valleys! doomed to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her latest cry from stiffening lips expire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>her Pedro’s name⁠—did catch that mournful sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose echoes bore it far and far around!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-134">
				<header>
					<p>134</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“E’en as a Daisy sheen, that hath been shorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in time untimely, floret fresh and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and by untender hand of maiden torn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to deck the chaplet for her wreathèd hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gone is its odour and its colours mourn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so pale and faded lay that Ladye there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>dried are the roses of her check, and fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the white live colour, with her dear life dead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-135">
				<header>
					<p>135</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Mondego’s daughter-Nymphs the death obscure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wept many a year, with wails of woe exceeding;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and for long mem’ry changed to fountain pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the floods of grief their eyes were ever feeding:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The name they gave it, which doth still endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">revived Ignèz, whose murthered love lies bleeding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>see yon fresh fountain flowing ’mid the flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>tears are its waters, and its name “Amores!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-136">
				<header>
					<p>136</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Time ran not long, ere Pedro saw the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of vengeance dawn for wounds that ever bled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who, when he took in hand the kingly sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">eke took the murth’erers who his rage had fled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Them a most cruel Pedro did betray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for both, if human life the foemen dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>made concert savage and dure pact, unjust as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lepidus made with Anth’ony and Augustus.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-137">
				<header>
					<p>137</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This in his judgments rig’orous and severe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">plunder, advoutries, murtherers supprest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To stay with cruel grasp Crime’s dark career,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bred sole assurèd solace in his breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A Justiciary, not by love but fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he guarded Cities from haught tyrant-pest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their doom more robbers dree’d by his decrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>than Theseus slew, or vagueing Hercules.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-138">
				<header>
					<p>138</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Pedro, the harshly just, begets the bland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(see what exceptions lurk in Nature’s laws!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">remiss, and all-regardless prince, Fernand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who ran his realm in danger’s open jaws:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For soon against the weak, defenceless land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">came the Castilian, who came nigh to cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the very ruin of the Lusian reign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for feeble Kings enfeeble strongest strain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-139">
				<header>
					<p>139</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Or ’twas the wages Sin deserves of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that filchèd Léonor from marriage bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by false, misunderstood opinions driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">another’s wife, a leman-bride to wed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Or ’twas because his easy bosom given</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to vice and vileness, and by both misled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>waxèd effeminate weak; which may be true,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>for low-placed loves the highest hearts subdue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-140">
				<header>
					<p>140</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of such offences ever paid the pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">many, whom God allowed or willèd He;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those who fared forth to force the fair Helèn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Appius and Tarquin, eke, such end did see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Say, why should David of the saintly strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so blame himself? What felled th’ illustrious tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Benjamin? Full well the truth design a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pharaoh for Sara, Sichem for a Dinah.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-141">
				<header>
					<p>141</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But if so weakeneth forceful human breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">illicit Love, which spurns the golden mean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">well in Alcmené’s son we find the test</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as Omphalé disguis’ed to hero-quean.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Anthony’s fame a shade of shame confest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to Cleopatra bound by love too keen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor less thou, Punick victor! wast betray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by low allegiance to some Puglian maid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-142">
				<header>
					<p>142</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet say who, peradventure, shall secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his soul from Cupid armed with artful snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’mid the live roses, human snow so pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the gold and alabaster crystal-clare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who ’scapeth Beauty’s wiles and per’egrine lure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the true Medusa-face so awful fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which man’s imprison’d, witch-bound heart can turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no, not to stone, but flames that fiercely burn?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-143">
				<header>
					<p>143</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Who se’eth a firm-fixt glance, a gesture bland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">soft promises of angel-excellence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the soul transforming aye by charmed command;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">say, who from pow’er like this can find defence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pardie, he scantly blameth King Fernand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who pays, as he did, Love’s experience:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But human Judgment would, if fancy-free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>adjudge his laches even worse to be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
