<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">On the occasion of the famous Discovery of India, a notable and poetic Exhortation is addrest to the Princes of Christendom, arousing them to like Enterprises: Description of the Reign of Malabar wherein lieth the Empire of Calecut, at whose Port the Armada anchoreth: Appeareth the Moor Monsaydé who giveth information to the Gama and eke instructeth him concerning the natives of the land: The Catual, or Governor of Calecut, fareth to see the Fleet.</p>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Anchors, to Calecut safe come, the Fleet; (1⁠–⁠22)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Sent to its puissant King an Envoy goes; (23⁠–⁠27)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Monsaydé comes the Lusian ships to greet, (28⁠–⁠41)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of the Province telleth all he knows:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Gama fares the Samori to meet; (42⁠–⁠65)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Grace to the stranger th’ Indic people shows: (66⁠–⁠72)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then joint the Regent and the Moorman hie (73⁠–⁠end)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aboard, where many a flag and awning fly.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-7-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now th’ Armada near’d the Morning-land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">many so much desirèd to have seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Reigns by those Indic currents moated, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Gange who dwelleth in the sky terrene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Up Braves! and at them, an your valiant hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to snatch victorious Palms determined bene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here ends your warfare; here before you lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the realm of riches and your rightful prize.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To you, O race from Lusus sprung! I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to whom such puny part of Earth is dole’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nay, what say I of Earth, but of His sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who ruleth all the rounded skies enfold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">You, whom ne dangers dure ne dire dismay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from conqu’ering brutal Heathenesse withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but eke no greed of gain may wean from love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Mother-essence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a> throned the Heavens above.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ye, Portingalls! as forceful as ye’re few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who e’er disdain to weigh your weakly weight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ye, who at cost of various deaths be true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Laws of Life Eternal to dilate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cast by the heav’enly lots your lot ye drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">however poor or mean your mundane state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>great deeds for Holy Christendom to show:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So high, O <strong>Christ</strong>! exaltest Thou the low!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>See them, those Germans, stiff-neckt, herd-like horde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who browse the pastures of such wide extent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to him rebellious who hath Peter’s ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">choose a new Shepherd, a new Sect invent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See them absorbed in ugly wars abhor’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(nor yet with blinded errant ways content!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>fight, not the haught tyrannick Othoman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but th’ apostolick yoke they fain unspan.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>See the hard Englander<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a> proclaim his right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of that old Sacred City King to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where reigns and rules the base-born Ishmaelite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(Honour of Truth so nude who e’er did see!);</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’mid Boreal snows he taketh sad delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to mould new mode of old Christianity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For those of <strong>Christ</strong> he bares the ready brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>not to rethrone Lord <strong>Christ</strong> in Holy Land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Holds for himself meanwhile a faithless Roy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Jerus’alem City, the terrestrial;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who holds not holy law, but dares defy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Jerus’alem City, the celestial.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then what of thee, vile Gaul<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a> what need say I?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who wouldst thy vaunting self “Most Christian” call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>not that such title wouldest ward and guard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but that the name thro’ thee be smircht and mar’d!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thy claim to conquer Christian lands beseems</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">one who so much and such fair land doth claim?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">why seek not Cinyps<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a> and the Nilus, streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which ever hate that ántique Holy Name?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There should they feel of steel the hard extremes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who would the Church’s truthful song defame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Charles, of Louis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a> name thou didst inherit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and lands;⁠—why not of justest wars the merit?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What shall I say of those who ’mid delights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which vilest Idlesse bare for manhood’s bane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">spend life and love to waste the gold that blights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and clean forget their ancient valiant strain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tyrannick best to hostile act incites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which virile races view as foulest stain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee I speak, O It’aly! sunk by curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of thousand sins, who dost thyself adverse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah, wretched Christians, who such cross incur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">be you perchance the teeth by Cadmus sown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that waste of brother-blood ye thus prefer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when all by self-same mother-womb are grown?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How durst you see yon Holy Sepulture</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">owned by the bandogs who such feuds disown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who come to hold and have your ancient ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their warlike prowess making them renown’d?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ye know ’tis now their usance and decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereof they are observantists entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to levy restless hosts of Heathenry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and harm the hearts that dear <strong>Christ’s</strong> love desire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">While fierce Alecto ’mid your chivalry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for ever soweth tares of wrath and ire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look! an your eyes to risks like these ye close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>how they and you to you be deadliest foes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If lust of lucre and of lordship led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">your course to conquer far and foreign lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">see you not Hermus and Pactólus shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">adown their fertile valleys aureate sands?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Assyria, Lydia, spin the golden thread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lurk veins of sheeny ore in Africk strand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let these rich treasures sluggish sprites arouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>since rouse you not the rights of Holy House.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Those fierce projectiles, of our days the work,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">murtherous engines, dire artilleries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against Byzantine walls, where dwells the Turk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">should long before have belcht their batteries.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh, hurl it back in forest-caves to lurk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Caspian crests and steppes of Scythia freeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that Turkish ogre-prog’eny multiplied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by op’ulent Europe’s policy and pride.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Georgians, Armenians, Grecians, hapless Thrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">cry on your name to quell th’ unspeakable horde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that dooms parforce their darlings to embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alcoran’s precepts (tax of blood abhor’d!):</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Prove, when you punish yon inhuman race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Sage’s spirit and the Soldier’s sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor covet arr’ogant praise and vainest boast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of vaunting valour o’er a brother-host.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But while ye blindly thirst to drink the blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of your own veins, Oh hapless Race insane!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">never hath failèd Christian hardihood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in this our little household Lusitane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her seats are set by Africk’s salty flood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she holds in Asian realms the largest Reign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sows and ears o’er all the Fourth new-found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and there would hasten had but Earth more ground.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile behold we what new chance befell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the seld-seen Voyagers who Fame would earn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Since gentle Venus deigned the gale to quell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and futile furies of fierce winds to spurn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when they the large-spread Land’s appearance hail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of stubborn obst’inate toil the bound and bourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and where the Saviour’s seed they wend to sow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>enthrone new lords, new lights, new laws bestow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as along the stranger-shores they lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a fragile fleet that fishing people bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they found, and by such guidance learnt the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to Calecut, whose denizens they were:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thither inclined the Prores without delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for ’twas the City fairest ’mid the fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in land of Malabar and where abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the King, whose orders all that Region owe’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Outside of Indus, inside Ganges, lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a wide-spread country famed enough of yore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">northward the peaks of caved Emódus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a> rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and southward Ocean doth confine the shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She bears the yoke of various sovranties</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and various eke her creeds: While these adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>vicious Mafóma, those to stock and stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bow down, and eke to brutes among them grown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There, deep i’ the mighty Range, that doth divide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the land, and cutteth Asian continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose crests are known by names diversified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of ev’ry country where its trend is bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">outburst the fountains, which commingling glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in pow’erful streams, that die when travel-spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in Indic Ocean, and the arms of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>convert the country to a Chersonèse:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Twixt either river from this breadth of base</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">puts forth the spacious land a long thin horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">quasi-pyramidal, which in th’ embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Ocean lies with Isle Ceylón toforn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, near the source that shows the natal place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Gange, if olden Fame of Truth be born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the happy Peoples of th’ adjacent bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>feed on the fragrance of the finest flowers;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now of many usance, mode and name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are all the tribes who have and hold the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pathans and Delhis urge the proudest claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to land and numbers, for they most abound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Deccanis, Oriás, who both misclaim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">salvation in the sounding flood is found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by Ganges rolled; and here the land Bengal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is rich in sort her wealth exceedeth all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sovranty of bellicose Cambay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(men say ’twas puissant Porus’ olden reign);</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Narsinga’s Kingdom, with her rich display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of gold and gems but poor in martial vein:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here seen yonside where wavy waters play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a range of mountains skirts the murmuring Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>serving the Malabar for mighty mure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who thus from him of Canará dwells secure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The country-people call this range the Ghaut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from its foot-hills scanty breadth there be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose seaward-sloping coast-plain long hath fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’gainst Ocean’s natural ferocity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here o’er her neighbour Cities, sans a doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Calecut claimeth highest dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>crown of the kingdom fair and flourishing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here he entitled “Samorim”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a> is King.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived the Squadron off that wealthy land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she sent a Portingall to make report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so mote the Géntoo monarch understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who hath arrivèd in his distant port:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A stream the Herald struck which, leaving land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">entereth Ocean; and his novel sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his hue, his strange attire, his stranger-ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>made all the lieges gather round to gaze.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Amid the swarming rout that thronged to view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">cometh a Muslim, who was born and bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in distant Barb’ary ’mid her barbarous crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there, where in ancient day Antaeus sway’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Right well the Lusitanian realm he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or by the scanty distance thither led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>or ’signèd by the Sword and Fortune’s brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to long-drawn exile in a foreign land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With jocund mien our Messenger to sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for-that he speaketh well the speech of Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he thus:⁠—“Who brought thee to this new world’s bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far from thy Fatherland, the Lusitan?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Op’ening,” respondeth he, “the seas profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which never openèd the race of man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for Indus’ mighty flood we hither bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to win for Holy Faith one triumph more.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By the long voyage sore astonied stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Moor Monsaydé, thus his name was known;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when told the Lusian how the terr’ible flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">had all the temper of a tyrant shown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But, as that errand’s drift, he understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">concern’d the Ruler of the Land alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he tells the stranger how the Monarch lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>outside the city at a little way:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And that while travelled to the royal ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">news of that advent strange, if judged he meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">repairing to his humble dwelling near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’twere well refreshment of the land to eat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whence by short rest restorèd and good cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the twain together might regain the Fleet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for life has nothing like the joy and glee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherewith near neighbours meet in far countrie.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Portingall, accepting not ingrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what glad Monsaydé for his guest deviseth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as though their friendship were of olden date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">eats, drinks, and does whate’er the host adviseth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now from the City wend they, making straight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">towards the Squadron which the Moor agniseth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and scale the Flagship’s flank, where all the crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with kindly glances Moor Monsaydé view.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Embraceth him our Chief, whom hugely please</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the well-remembered accents of Castile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seateth him near, and asketh him at ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">anent the land and folk therein that dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Even as flockt on Rhodopé the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to hear the Lover of the Damosel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eurydice, his lyre of gold resound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Folk to hearken flockt the Moor around.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then he: “O Nation! who by Nature’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was ’stablished neighbour to my natal nide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what mighty Chance, what Destiny’s command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon such voyage drave you far and wide?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Not causeless, no; though darkly, deeply plan’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from unknown Minho, distant Tagus-tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>your course o’er Oceans aye by keel unplow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to Reigns such distance and such dangers shroud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“God bringeth you, pardie! for He intendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">some special service which your works await:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For this alone He guideth and defendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from en’emies, Ocean and the winds’ wild hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Know, that ye look on Inde wherein extendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a world of nations, rich and fortunate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in lucent gold, and gems of princely price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and odorif’erous fumes and biting spice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This Province, in whose Port your ships have tane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">refuge, the Malabar by name is known;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">its ántique rite adoreth idols vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Idol-religion being broadest sown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of divers Kings it is; but ’twas the Reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as olden legend saith, of only one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hight the last King was Sarmá Perimal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>who ’neath one sceptre held the Kingdom all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But as this region there and then was sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by other races from the Arab Bight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who Mahometic worship with them brought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the same my parents planted in my sprite⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">it hapt their wisdom and their pray’ers so wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon the Perimal; and lit such light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that to the Faith convert with fervour high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he only hoped a Saint in it to die.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He mans his ships and loads with merchandise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and many an offering curious, rare and rich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and there religious life to lead he hies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where lies our Prophet who our Law did preach:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But ere abandon’d home, his satrapies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that lackèd lawful heir, he parts to each</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and all he lovèd: Hence his intimates he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from want made wealthy, and from serfdom free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To this Cochim, to that falls Cananor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">one hath Chalé, another th’ Isle Piment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a third Coulam, a fourth takes Cranganor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the rest is theirs with whom he rests content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Only one Youth, for whom warm love he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when all was parted, did himself present:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing save Calecut for him remainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which, by her traffick, wealth and rank had gainèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“On him the title par’amount he bestows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Emperor, with sway o’er ev’ery state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, made this partage, there he dil’igent goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where, after Santon-life, he met his fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus ’twas the name of Samorim arose⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of all this region proudest potentate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>borne by the Youth, and by his heirs from whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>this who now wields imperial pow’er is come.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The Law that holds the people, high and low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is fraught with false fantastick tales long past:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they go unclothèd, but a wrap they throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for decent purpose round the loins and waist:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Two modes of men are known; the nobles know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the name of Nayrs, who call the lower caste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poléas, whom their haughty laws contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from intermingling with the higher strain:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For men who aye had office in one guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with mates of other office ne’er may wive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor may the son the calling exercise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">save sire’s and foresires’ long as he shall live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These Nayrs as sin and shame, forsooth, despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the touch of outcasts, and they fain believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that, peradventure, if the touch occur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a thousand rites must wash their bodies pure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In sim’ilar form the Júdaean folk of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">touch’d not the peoples of Samaria-reign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But strangenesses far stranger than I’ve told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of varied usages shall meet your eyne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">None save the Nayrs affront the manifold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">chances of war, who like stone-wall sustain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their King from enemies, arms aye in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in left the target, and in right the brand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Entitled Brahmins are their ghostly race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">time-honour’d title of high eminence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His far-famed precepts, eke, they still embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who first to Science lent a modest sense:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A living thing to kill they hold as base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such be from ev’ery flesh their abstinence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only in joys venereal their delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hath more of licence and a laxer rite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Common the women are, although confine’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to those belonging to their husbands’ blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Happy condition! happy humankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who over jealous wrongs may never brood!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These and more customs various shall ye find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">among the Mal’abar men still holding good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great is the country, rich in ev’ery style</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of goods from China sent by sea to Nyle.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus spake the Moorman: Now on vagueing wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">about the city Rumour wildly flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with bruit of foreign comers; when the King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sent out his servants seeking tidings true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then through the streets begirt by mighty ring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of ev’ery age and sex that flockt to view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>came the Grandees who by the King were bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to bring the Captain of the strange Armade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But he by royal leave allow’d for land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to change his floating home, accompanied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by his stout Portingalls, a chosen band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in richest robes to meet the Monarch hied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The beauteous contrasts of the hues command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the crowd’s approval, who with wonder eyed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smiteth the cadence’d oar with cooly gleam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>now the salt ocean, then the frore fresh stream.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There stood a Regent of the Realm ashore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a chief, in native parlance “Cat’ual”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a> hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by noble Nayrs surrounded, waiting for</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">illustrious Gama, with a strange delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now to the land our Chief in arms he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and a rich-cushion’d couch in litter light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he proff’ereth as a coach (an usage old),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which bearer-people on their shoulders hold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus he of Lusus, he of Malabar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wend whither sitteth ’waiting them the King:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Follow the Portingalls in form of War</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for foot-troops, marching fierce and threatening:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The people, buzzing with confusèd jar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to see the strangers, fain of questioning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>gather’d, but in the cent’uries long gone by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Babel-tower did such hope deny.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now with the Cat’ual Gama speech exchangèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on things th’ occasion and the moment chose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Interpreteth the tongues so far estrangèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Monsaydé, for the twain right well he knows.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus the procession through the City rangèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whither a noble, splendid pile arose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, reached the precincts of a sumptuous Fane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>through the tall portals paced on equal plane.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here frightful forms of men’s idolatries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">stand carved in lifeless stock and death-cold stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">varied in gestures, various of dyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en as by feigning Fiend to man made known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Abominable forms the sight surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with mingled members like Chimaera shown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Christians, wont to see their God-in-Man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>these hybrid monsters with blank wonder scan.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One bore two horns insculpture’d on his brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">like Jove called Ammon in the Libyan wold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this, double faces on one form did show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">like two-faced Janus limned in church of old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that had of arms a long divided row</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mocking Briareus’ members manifold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that thing a canine front external bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>such as th’ Anubis Memphians did adore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The barb’arous Géntoo in his Gods’ abode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a superstitious adoration paid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then both went straight, ne’er straying from the road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where the vain people’s King his sojourn made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The stream of starers fuller still o’erflow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for all to sight the stranger Chief essay’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while to the roofs and casements gazing came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>greybeard and stripling, damosel and dame.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now near they, marching with no shorten’d stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fair fragrant gardens and perfumèd bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein the royal palace-buildings hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a structure sumptu’ous though not tall in towers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The chiefs and nobles choose to build and ’bide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where cooly bosquets teem with fruits and flowers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus dwell the rulers of the race, delighting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in seats the City and the Camp uniting.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The precinct portals by their work betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">subtleties telling of the daedal hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in forms whose noble presences display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the hoar antiquities of India-land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The marvel-stories of her ancient day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with such a living art enfigured stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that whoso reads them with a lore exact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>knows from the Fiction what hath been the Fact.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There puissant armies show and proudly tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that Orient region which Hydaspes laves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a smooth brow’d Capitayne is at the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and with his leafy Thyrsus leads his Braves.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By him was Nysa-city ’stablishèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hard by the margin of the murm’urous waves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>so proper was the God e’en Semelé</span>
					<br/>
					<span>her son beholding would have said, “ ’Tis he!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And there yon arrowy river draining dry</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">th’ Assyrian peoples multitud’inous bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a queenly sceptre, fem’inine seigniory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of fair the fairest and as foul as fair.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fast by her side with fury flaming high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her sculptured genet proudly paweth air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in whom her son a rival lover fand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh vile incont’inence! Oh amour nefand!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At farther distance trembled in their pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the flags and banners of the glorious Greek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Monarchies the Third, and conqu’ering hied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far as the bill’owy Gange his sea doth seek:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That youthful Captain’s semblance is their guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom Vict’ory’s wreathèd palms of valour deck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who claims a seat among the Gods above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no longer Philip’s son, but son of Jove.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While on these mem’ories dwelt the Portughuese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thus did the Cat’ual to the Captain say:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Soon dawns the day when other victories</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall these thou seest, dim and disarray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here shall indited be new histories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">made by the Wand’erers who shall wend this way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Fate was found by wise and wizard men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>inspirèd Magians who the future ken.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And eke inspireth them the magick sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that nought availeth to defend such Ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of all that mortals bring to their defence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for earthly Wits must bend to heav’enly Will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">It also saith the Stranger’s excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in Arts of Peace, as in his bellic skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall be so puissant, all the world shall know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Conq’ueror’s measure by his conquered Foe.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Discoursing thus they reached the levèe-hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein that great and glorious Emperor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sat on a cushion’d couch which, though ’twas small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for work and worth was never seen before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Showed his reclining gest imperial</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a potent, grave, and prosperous Signior:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Golden his loin-cloth, and the diadem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that crowns his brow doth blaze with many a gem.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hard by his side an old man reverent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">knelt on the floor, and now and then a few</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">green leaves of pungent pepper did present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in wonted usage for the Sire to chew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A Brahmin, personage pre-eminent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with gliding gait beside the Gama drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and led him up the potent King to greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who with a nod designed a facing seat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When near that splendid couch took place the guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and others farther off, prompt glance and keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Samo’rim cast on folk whose garb and gest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">were like to nothing he had ever seen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, speaking gravely from his stately breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">adding authority to noble mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and gaining credence of the King and crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his royal message spake our Chief aloud:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“A mighty King there thronèd, whither roll</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">voluble Heavens in eternal round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Earth by Earth conceals the rays of Sol,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">tingeing the world he left with gloom profound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hearing the rumours which from distant goal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">respond to Echo, how on Indic ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thine is the sole imperial Majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the knot of Friendship lief would knit with thee.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And by long devious courses his command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sent me to say, that all things mercantile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which go by ocean or which go by land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">supplied by realms betwixt the Tage and Nyle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from foggy Zealand’s frore Pole-fronting strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to the far lands where Sol ne’er changeth style</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of days, that splendid shine on Aethiop shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all these his kingdom holds in mighty store.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And if thou wilt, with pacts and firmest ties</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of naked, sacred Peace and Friendship rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">allow exchange of superfluities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his earth and thine with like abundance bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">making the rents and rev’enues richer rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(wherefore men toil and travail, sweat and fare)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for both the countries, certès, shall pertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to him great glory and to thee great gain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And when thus knitted Friendship’s steadfast knot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which aye you mighty monarchs twain shall bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">prompt will he be against all adverse lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by chance of warfare to thy reign design’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with soldiers, arms, and ships; so men shall wot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy friend and brother they in him shall find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hopeth eke that when thy course is tracèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by sure response to see my mission gracèd.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such royal message spake our Chief before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Géntoo King, who thus vouchsafed reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that to receive such fair Ambassador</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from land so far he holdeth honour high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But that his final will fain standeth o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till tane the counsel of his ministry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who shall make certain, after long debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what King he speaketh of, what race, what state.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile from labours past the Chief may wend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where rest awaits him, and in brief delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to the despatch he will due care extend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereby their King shall greet their homeward way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This said, brought sombre Night the wonted end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to human labours of the livelong Day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>soothing the weary limbs with balmy swoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and tirèd eyne with sweet Oblivion’s boon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Gama, with his Portingalls remainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom, upon hospitable thought intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the noble Indian Regent entertainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with feast and joy and general content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Cat’ual, to his monarch’s service trainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sought surest tidings; ’twas his regiment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to learn how, when, and whence the Folk had come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what laws were theirs, what customs, and what home.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as he saw the Delian Car of fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fair Youth drives, come forth and light restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he summoneth Monsaydé for desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to know the strangers new to th’ Indian shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ready and curious now he ’gins enquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if certain signs, pure proofs, the Moorman bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>anent these foreigners, as men had said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hard by his country they were born and bred:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That punct’ual proof partic’ular he must bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with general information; as ’twould be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">notable service done to tell the King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all that could guide him in such novelty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rejoins Monsaydé:⁠—“Alb’eit ev’erything</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I lief recount, yet count it not from me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I only ken they bide in distant Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where bathe my nest and Phoebus in the Main.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“They hold a Prophet’s Law who was begot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sinless, nor stained with carnal detriment</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His Virgin-Mother; Him the Breath<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a> they wot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of God who holdeth Earth in government.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But what my sires ancestral ne’er forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of them, is Valour fierce, sanguinolent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in arms, that on their arm resplendent gloweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as many a Geste with our forefathers showeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For they, with brav’ery better than of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">outdrave our grandsires from the fertile leas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where fresh Guadiána and rich Tagus ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with famed and memorable instances:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Still seeking triumphs, in far African</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">parts, spurning perils of the stormy seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>our plans of safety and of peace they foil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they break our lofty walls, our towns they spoil.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor less of force and fraud they showed, whene’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">kindled were other wars by Fate’s decree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or when Spain’s warlike sons to fight would fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or there, when others poured down Pyrenee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And thus, in fine, to thrust of foreign spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne’er bowed they, owning alien mastery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ne’er yet was known, I swear no man can tell us</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to Hannibals like these e’er came Marcellus.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And if my tidings faulty seem and few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what thou requirest that to ask them send;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ask of themselves, for they be proud and true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and falsehoods most annoy them and offend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Go see their fleet and arms, their manner view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of moulded metal, ready all to shend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wend thou and note the Lusians’ various art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in Peace and War, the sight shall glad thy heart.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Flamed with desire the Idol-servant’s mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to sight the marvels told him by the Moor:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He bade the boats be manned, and straight incline’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to view the vessels which the Gama bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Both leave the foreshore, and their boat behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">came Nayran hosts, till Ocean curdled o’er:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They scale the Flagship’s gunwales strong and tall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, reacht the main-deck, are received by Paul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her purple awnings and her banners shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the rich tissue which the worm hath made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereon appear portray’d with rare design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the warlike actions of the mighty Dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here show fierce accidents of ’battled line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and there fere single-fights, a scene of dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherefrom the Géntoo seeking all to ’spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>may not withdraw the pleasure of his eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He asks of all he sees: But Gama pray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he first be seated, and in cool retreat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">be pleased to taste the food before him spread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which Epicurus’ sect holds highest treat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The spumy vases gen’erous liquors shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which first did Noah make the world to weet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet nills the Géntoo-man to break his fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as ’twas forbidden by the laws of Caste.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The blaring Trumpet, which in Peace the thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Warfare im’ages, rends the lift like thunder:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The diabolick instruments fire-fraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wake slumb’ering echoes there, the sea-depths under.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Noted the Géntoo all: But most he sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to read th’ intention and the works of wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>done by the Heroes which in scanty space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Picture, mute Poesy, had power to trace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He riseth, Gama rising by his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and there Coelho with the Mauritan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With curious eyne a warlike form they eye’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">an old white Sire of aspect sovereign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose name and honours in our hearts shall ’bide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">long as the World shall know the name of man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In garb of Grecian usage stands he dight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bearing device of leaf-branch in his right.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His right a leaf-branch bore:⁠—But oh! how blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I madly rush to ’tempt without your stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ye Nymphs of Tagus and Mondego kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a path so varied, long and ard’uous way!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lend me your favour while my way shall wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er the deep Ocean ’mid the Storm’s affray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for sore I fear me an ye leave the helm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the waves my fragile barque shall overwhelm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>See how my Lay so long to sing hath striven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">your Tagus and the Lusians dear to you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how oft this exile Fate from home hath driven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">new labours ever suff’ering, losses new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now tempting Ocean, then all helpless driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the dread Mavortian risks and wrongs to rue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>self-doomed as Canacé to death abhor’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in this hand aye the Pen, in that the Sword:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now sunk by hateful scornèd Penury</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to chew the bitter bit of beggar-bread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then mockt by Hope already brought so nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to be anew and more than e’er misled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then with bare life in hand condemned to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where life depended from so fine a thread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>only a greater miracle could save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>than what to Judah’s King<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a> new life-lease gave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And still, my Nymphs! ’twas not enough of pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such sorrow-clouds around my life should close;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but they, for whom I sang the patriot-strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with sad return must pay my toils, my throes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In place of Peace and Rest I hoped to gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in lieu of Bay-wreaths bound around my brows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>troubles by men unseen they must invent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when ills of every kind my soul torment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Behold, ye Nymphs! what high-bred Lords and wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">breedeth your Tagus, what a gen’erous race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who in such fashion with such favours prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Bard whose boon hath lent their lordships grace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For coming writers what examples rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to raise Man’s genius to its Pride of Place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to shrine memorious in the Poet’s story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeds that deserve to gain eternal glory!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But since such hosts of ills around me lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">let not my Fancy of your favour fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">here chiefest wanted as the goal draws nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that mighty feats wax mightier by my tale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Aid me you only, long indeed sware I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no grace to grant where good doth not prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and none to flatter whatso their degrees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on pain of losing all my pow’er to please.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Think not, ah no, my Nymphs! I would enfame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the man who dares his country and his King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">forget for private int’erest’s pit’iful claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by law of God and Man a felon thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor poor ambition, whose degraded aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is to win office, shall my Song e’er sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose only object in th’ ignoble prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is larger range of Vice and Infamies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>None, who misusing pow’ers on him confer’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">makes them the panders of his ugly greed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">none, who to court and cringe before the herd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in change of figure Proteus shall exceed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From me, Camenae, fear no fav’ouring word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for him who comes, in grave and honest weed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in new-born rank his King contenting more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to fleece and flay the miserable poor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nor him who, holding ’tis but just and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his King’s severest orders to fulfil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">holds it not Justice fitly to requite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the servile brows that weary sweat distil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor him whose bosom, lacking pract’ical light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeketh for causes, and by prudent skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>taxeth with niggard heart and hand unfair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the toils of aliens which he doth not share.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Only of men I’ll sing the glorious name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who riskèd darling life for God, for King;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when losing life they lengthened life by fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and well deserved the best that Bard can sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Apollo and the Nine, who with me came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">redoubled fury to my song shall bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when rest and breathing from my travail tane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I to my toil refresht shall come again.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
