<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">The Governor of Calecut seeth various pictures upon the banners of the Armada; and heareth the account of them given by Paul da Gama: Origin of the word “Lusitania”: Glorious feats of the Portugueze Kings (and of their Vassals) till the reign of King <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title z3998:initialism">D.</abbr> Afonso <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>: The Samori ordereth the Haruspices to consult futurity respecting the Armada: They report to him evil of the Navigators: They attempt to destroy Da Gama who satisfieth the King in a notable speech.</p>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Seen are the Founders of the Lusian race, (1⁠–⁠42)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Braves whose valiant actions brightest shine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On Mem’ory’s page deserving highest place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tuneful hymn, and Poet’s numbered line:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What way of Calecut the Regents base (43⁠–⁠end)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Consult the famous Augurs who design,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bought with all-puissant bribes, to show their skill,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by their cunning the Discov’erers kill.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-8-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Tarried the Cat’ual, standing mute before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the first of painted forms that stood in sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who for Device in hand a leaf-branch bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with meteor-beard, long-flowing, flossy-white.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Whose counterfeit presentment this; wherefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the strange device he holdeth in his right?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Paul, with sober accents answering said⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while the wise Moor for both interpretèd:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“All of these figures which to thee are shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so bold in bearing, dreadful to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and bolder, dreader far, the men were known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in mouth of Fame, for words and works of old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ancients yet moderns are, still brighter grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with names in Genius’ highest rank enrol’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This first in sight is Lusus, from whose fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>our ‘Lusitania’ gained her royal name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He was the Theban’s son or comrade tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the God who divers regions overran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">it seems he came to hold our Spanish nide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pursuing conquests which his youth began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Douro’s and Guadiána’s plains of pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of yore ‘Elysian Fields,’ his fancy wan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>so much, he there would give his weary bones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Tomb eterne, the term our country owns.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The branch-Device, thou see’st him bear in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is the green Thyrsus Bacchus wont to wield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which to our cent’ury doth belief command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he was a comrade or belovèd child.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See’st thou yon other treading Tagus-land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Plow’er who long hath plow’d the wild Sea-field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where the perpetual walls he reared on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and fane of Pallas for all memory?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ulysses ’tis who builds that sacred fane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to her, whose favour tongue facund supplies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if there he fired tall Troy on Asian plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">here made he mighty Lisbon’s walls arise.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Whom have we here, who cumbers with the slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the field, whose furious presence frights the eyes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drives great armies to disgraceful rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and on his banners painted eagles float.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Géntoo thus, and Gama’s answer came:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Thou see’st a Herdsman who his flock forsook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we know that Viriátus was his name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who aye preferred the Lance before the Crook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He shook and shattered Roman pride and fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from this unvanquisht victor ne’er she took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, no! nor ever could her power take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the primacy which Pyrrhus failed to break.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Not force but fraud she used, and underhand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she filcht his life that cowed her coward sprite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for mighty straits make men of honest brand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">break the magnan’imous laws of Honour bright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This other here, against his angry land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with us forgatherèd, an exiled wight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right well chose he the men wherewith to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and of immortal lustre snatch the prize.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou see’st with us he beats the Flags that bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Jove’s valiant birds, victorious, sovereign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en in those days no Braves so brave but wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our yoke, subjected to our might and main:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See his so subtle arts, his wily care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the people by his deep design to gain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that Prophet-Hind aye dealing wise advice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sertorius he; the Doe is his Device.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See now this other painted flag upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of our first Kings the great progenitor:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our Hist’ory makes him to be Hung’ary’s son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but strangers say Lorraine the hero bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When with the chivalry of proud Leon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and the Gallego he lay low the Moor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unto Sanct Sep’ulchre saintly Henry hied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that might his kingly trunk be sanctified.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Say, prithee, who be this that frights my sight?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(asketh th’ astonied man of Malabar)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“who all these squadrons, all these men of might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with his thin legions thus can rout and mar?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who breaks such bulwarks proud in breadth and height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who gives such battle, never tired of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who comes so many crowns in many parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to trample under foot, and estandarts?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The First Afonso ’tis,” the Gama spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“by whom the Moor all Portugalia lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for whom Fame sware her oath by Stygian Lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no more of noble Roman name to boast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Zealot he whom God would ne’er forsake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by whose brave arm He tames the Moorish host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for whom their wallèd reign He lays so low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no more is left for future days to do.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Had Caesar, or King Alexander led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a power so puny, men-at-arms so few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against the multitudes unnumberèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this excellent Commander overthrew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">deem not their names had earth thus overspread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor could their deathless glories death subdue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But leave we such inexplicable Deeds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and see what worth of vassal-men he leads.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This whom thou seest sight with kindling eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his broken pupil, fierce in high disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bidding him rally flying hosts, and try</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">once more the desp’erate fortunes of the plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Returneth Youth with Age to do or die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and turns the vanquisht Vanquisher again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Egas Moníz, the gallant vet’eran hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is Knighthood’s mirror to each loyal knight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See’ him here self-yielded with his sons he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">naked of silk and cloth with neck in cord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">because the Youth to break the promise chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which to Castile he gave with plighted word:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He lured by specious promises the foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to raise the siege when sov’ereign waged the sword:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To life’s last pains he dooms his sons and wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and self-condemnèd saves his Liege’s life.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Less did the Consul<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> whom the hosts surround</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when to the Caudine Forks he careless came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and there his head to bow and pass was bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’neath the triumphant Samnites’ yoke of shame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This, blamed at home, an inborn firmness found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to yield him singly, true to constant aim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>this other yieldeth self and innocent seed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and wife⁠—more glorious and more grievous deed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See’st thou the Brave who, left his ambuscade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">falls on the King besieging yon tall town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the town unsieging and the King waylaid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Illustrious action Mars might call his own!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See him, here wends he, limned in yon Armade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till eke at sea the Moormen slain or flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lost all their galleys; while he claims the prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that heads our host of maritime victories:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Fuás Roupinho ’tis; o’er wave and land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his name shall aye resplend with equal light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">reflecting flames that lit his daring hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in Moorman galleys under Ab’yla’s height.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See how at just and saintly War’s command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">happy he loses life in holy fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enters by Moorish hands the heavenly calm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his Soul, triumphant with the well-won Palm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See’st not this Gath’ering in strange garb that came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">swarming from out yon Navy new and brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who holp our first of Kings the foe to tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and ’leaguing Lisbon saintly proof they gave?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behold Henrique,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> Knight of peerless fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and eke the Palm that grew beside his grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ them His marvels God to man hath shown:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Germans be they the martyrs <strong>Christ</strong> shall own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold a Churchman brandishing his skeyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against Arronches which he takes, the chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Leïría ’venging lately tane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by men who couch for Mafamed the lance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Tis Theotonio, Prior.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a> See again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">besiegèd Sant’arem, and shalt see the glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>assured that figures on the mure and first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wave o’er the walls the Quinal Banner durst:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See here he hies, where low our Sancho layeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Vandal Moor who in fierce fight atones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pierceth th’ opponent host, his Ancient slayeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and trails th’ Hispalic pendon o’er the stones:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Mem Moniz he, who in his life portrayeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the valour buried with his Father’s bones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>digne of these Banners, since his force ne’er failèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to raise his own, to rout whate’er assailèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold that other, sliding down his spear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bearing two head of sentinels he slew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">better to hide his ambush; now appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his Braves whose might and sleight the town o’erthrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And now her ’scutcheon shows the Cavalier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">proper who holds in hand the coupèd two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>cold ghastly heads. A deed ne’er done indeed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Giraldo Sem-pavor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> the stout name read.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See’st not a Spaniard<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> who, dissatisfied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with our ninth King Afonso, by old hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Lara movèd, with the Moor abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in friendship hostile to our Port’ugal state?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Abrantes town he takes accompanied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the hard Infidel, his Moorish mate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But see a Portingall with pow’er so spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>rout him, and stoutly lead him prisoner:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Martim Lopés the Knight by name is known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who from the traitors palms and laurels took.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But here behold the Bishop Mil’itant shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who changed for steely Lance his golden Crook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See him, ’mid faithless faithful found alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fight to refuse refusing, shake and shock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the cruel Moorman: See in shining skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the sign whereby his few he multiplies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See, fly the Kings of Cord’oba and Sevile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">routed, with other twain in shortest tale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Routed! nay, rather, ruined. Miracle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">God-wrought, not worked by arm of mortal frail!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Alcacer low bend her haughty will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne tow’ers of flesh, ne walls of steel avail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’gainst Lisbon’s Bishop, Dom Mathéus: See!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>crowned with the palmy crown there standeth he.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold a Master of Castilian line,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Portingall by right of birth, o’errun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Algarves Kingdom till she shows no sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of men-at-arms his force hath not undone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By guile, and might and main, and star benign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">towns, castles, cities, all are stormed and won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon ’spite her townsmen Tavila-town he breaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and for the Se’ven slain Hunters vengeance takes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See him with bellic arts from Moormen gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sylves, they gainèd with enormous host:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Paio Corrêa ’tis, whose might and main</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and cunning purpose men aye envy most.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor pass the fighting three<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> in France and Spain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who won a name that never shall be lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for tournay, challenges and joustings gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>winning of public trophies proud display:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See’st them? how clept ‘Adventurers,’ they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Castileward, whence alone the prize and pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they bore, the winnings of Bellona’s game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as to their loss all found a fall who tried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See them strike down the Knights of proudest fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who of the three the principal defied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’tis Gónçalo Ribéiro, name so brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hath nought to fear from Lethe’s whelmy wave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To one attend, whose Fame so far extendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that with no fame of old she rests content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who, when his country on a thread dependeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lends stalwart shoulders to the burden bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See’st not how anger-flusht he reprehendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the cowèd throng’s suspicions cold and lent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and makes the wretches hail the gentle rein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of home-born King, not foreign Suzerain?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See him, with daring and advice replete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">God-guarded only and by Holy Star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">make possible th’ impossible, and defeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">one-handed, proud Castilia’s pow’er of war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See how by valour aided, might and wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in second slaughter vict’ory similar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he gains o’er those who, fierce as infinite, dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>betwixt Tartessus and Guadiána’s vale?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See’st not already all but overthrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Lusitanian pow’er, when left his line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Capitayne devout, who wends alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">t’ invoke that Essence, the Most Highest Trine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now see him summoned hast’ily by his own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who plead that Fortune must parforce incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to whelming force, and pray his presence cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the soldiers, and enforce their feeble fear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet see the careless holy confidence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith ‘ ’Tis not yet time,’ he answerèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as one in God reposing trust immense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of human vict’ory won by heav’enly aid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">E’en so Pompilius, hearing the offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of en’emies urging o’er his land the raid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to him who brought the heavy news replies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘But I, you see, am off’ering sacrifice!’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“If one whose Brave’ry rests his God upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">perchance thou wouldest know how named and known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Portugale’s Scipio’ is the name he won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but ‘Nuno Alvares’ claims more renown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Happy the Land that bare her such a son!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or, rather sire: For long as Suns look down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on Earth where Ceres and joint Neptune reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for such a Scion she shall sigh in vain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In the same Warfare see what prizes gaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this other Captain of a slender band;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">driving commanders he the drove regaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which they had lifted with audacious hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See how the lance again in gore he staineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">only to free, at Friendship’s firm command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his thrallèd friend whom Honour made a thrall:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pero Rodrigues ’tis of Landroal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Look on this Treachetour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a> and how he payeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his caitiff trick’ery and his perj’ury fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gil Fernandes of Elvas ’tis that slayeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the wretch, and sends him to his proper Hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Harrying Xeres-plain the crops he layeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with floods of blood that raineth proud Castile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But see how Rúy Pereira’s face and front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>enshield the galleys, bearing battle-brunt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See yon sev’enteen to Lusus who belong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon this hillock standing, life defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against the Spaniards who four hundred strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to take them captive in their rear extend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But to their sorrow these shall find ere long</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the stout defenders also can offend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feat digne to last till Earth succumb to Time;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in the far Past, in Present day sublime!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“How the three hundred Braves, ’twas known of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">did with a thousand Romans battle wage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the good times when virile deeds and bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which Viriátus did, illumed his age:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He snatcht memorious triumphs from their hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bequeathing this our noblest heritage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Brave though few shall ne’er the Many fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as sithence thousand times we proved full clear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Pedro and Henry view, those Infants twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of kingly John the gen’erous progeny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That gars his fame illustrious to remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in German-land and doometh Death to die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This Prince inspired by Heaven claimed the Main</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as her Explorer; and lay bare the lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of tumid Moor’s vain boast in Ceita’s wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, forced the gateway, entered first of all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See’st Country Pedro,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> daring to support</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">two sieges laid by Barb’ary’s might entire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and see’st yon other Count<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> who shows the port</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of earthly Mars in martial force and fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sufficeth not to fence Alcacer-fort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from swarming hosts; his spirit flieth higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his King’s beloved life the Brave defends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as stone-wall standing till his own he ends.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And here the Painters who in Art prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pardie, had many painted and portray’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but fail their pencils and their colours, fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">prize, praise, and premium, of Art’s life the bread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fault of the vices flowing from th’ entail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of men degen’erate, who so far have stray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from valour’s paths where trod their lustrous sires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>deep mired in vanities and low desires.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Those high illustr’ious Fathers who gave birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to generations on their grace depending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fought for fair <strong>Honour</strong>, sternly strove on Earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to found a fam’ily that could bear descending:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Blind! if paternal toils of priceless worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">won name, fame, claim so far and wide extending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they leave their lesser sons but more obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when left in crap’ulous vice to live impure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Als there be others, sons of wealth and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who to no lordly tree by birth belong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fault of the Kings, who oft some favourite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">prefer to thousands, wise and true and strong:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For these the painted Past hath poor delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">feeling vain colours work them present wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and aye as nat’ural foe in hate they bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the speaking pictures which their semblance wear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Gainsay I not, that some of high descent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from wealthy houses, men of gen’erous strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">still with their noble lives and excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’herited titles worthily sustain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And if the light which ancestry hath lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no novel glory by their doings gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>at least it faileth not, nor dim it groweth:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ah! few men like these the Painter knoweth.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Gama’s el’oquence told the mighty deeds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">disclosed by various tints to stranger view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Art to sing’ular Artist-hand concedes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">depainting Nature with her nat’ural hue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Cat’ual’s ready glance distinctly reads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the surd-mute story and the tale so true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand times he askt, a thousand heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>each tasteful battle which his eyne prefer’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now the light a doubtful lustre showèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when veiled the mighty Lamp its lucent ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">beneath the sky’s round rim, and lum’inous glowèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on our Antipodes the smile of Day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The gen’erous crowd of Nayrs and Géntoos rowèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">off from the stalwart ship on homeward way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>seeking repose and sleep’s delicious swoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to weary beings Night-tide’s gentle boon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile those Augurs who most fame affy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in false opinion, that by sacrifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">forecast of future things which dubious lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thro’ diabolick sign and show they wis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by royal mandate hied Black Arts to ply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and various offices ’gan exercise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to find what projects brought across the Main</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unheard of foreigners from unknown Spain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By Demon-aidance truthful sign they learn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how doth this novel visitor portend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a yoke perpet’ual, servitude eterne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Race’s ruin and its valour’s end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Th’ amazèd Augur, whom the proofs constern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wends to the King and tells (e’en as he ken’d)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the fearful symptoms that had met his sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by victim’d bowels brought anon to light.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These signs confirming, to a Priest devout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a man of mark in Mafamedé’s creed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from preconceivèd hatred not remote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’gainst Holy Faith, that doth all faiths exceed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the False Prophet’s form of evil note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who drew his being from slave Hagar’s seed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bacchus the hateful in a dream appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose hate is doubled by redoubled fears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Guard ye, my children, guard ye,”⁠—thus he spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“from snares and perils laid by deadly foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who o’er the tumid waters hither flock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">before the danger more immediate grows.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Moorman, startled by these words, awoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in visionary fear: But soon arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the thought that vulgar dream his brain opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thus returned he tranquil to his rest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Bacchus thus returneth:⁠—“Know’est thou not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the mighty Maker, who the Law devisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for thy forefathers, he whose will ye wot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and lacking whom had many been baptizèd?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I wake for thee, for me dost sleep, thou sot?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then by the Future soon shalt be advisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>how these new-comers come with bane and ban</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to break the laws I taught to seely man.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Until this feeble folk full force hath won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">contrive resistance in all manner o’ ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for, easy ’tis upon the rising Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">firm eyne to fix sans fear of blinding rays:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But, when to zenith hath his race been run</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the strongest eye-sight that would dare to gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>remaineth dazed, and so shall ye remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unless ye let them ere the root be tane.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then with the Dreamer’s sleep away he speedeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Trembling remains th’ astonisht Hagarene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">springing from couch his slaves bring light he biddeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fervid venom fest’ering in his spleen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As the pale dawn-light, which the sun precedeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">display’d her angel-cheek and brow serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>convoked the Doctors of the turpid sect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he of his vision renders ’count direct.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Divers opinions couchèd contrary</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are told and heard as each best understood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Astute waylayings, argute treachery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">were workt and woven in their vengeful mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But shirking treason which may danger dree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they sought the spilling of the Strangers’ blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with plots and projects of the subtlest school,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by bribes the Rulers of the Land to rule.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With golden bribe, rich fee, and secret gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they strive the country-principals to please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">showing with proofs discreet of not’able drift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how shall perdition all the people seize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“These be,” they say, “a folk of scanty thrift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rovers who run from occidental seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pyratick rapine is their sole design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sans Roy, sans Loy, or human or divine.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! how behooves the King, who rules aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to choose his counc’illors or his friends belovèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by rule of conscience, Virtue’s inner light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose sprites sincere affection long have provèd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The man exalted to that dizzy height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the kingly throne, of things from note removèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>can gain no notice sure, no knowledge clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>save what th’ adviser’s tongue will teach his ear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Much less I counsel Kings to rest secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the clear conscience of the men who show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of humble pauper cloak the form of lure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ambition haply lurketh rags below:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And men in all things pious, just, and pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">often of worldly knowledge little know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for ill shall trustful Innocence take part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in mundane matters, when God holds the heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But each and ev’ery Cat’ual gross in greed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the puissant rulers of the Gentile herd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gained by the glozings of the hellish breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unto the Portingalls dispatch defer’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Whereon the Gama⁠—whose one only heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">despite the mischief by the Moormen stir’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>was at the kingly feet sure sign to lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of the discover’d World left far away:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Worketh for this alone, as well he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that, when sure tidings and clear proofs appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">arms, armour, ships, and men would send anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Mano’el, the King who rules the Realm sans peer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that to his yoke and law he would subdue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the globèd earth, and e’en the wat’ery sphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>himself was nothing but the dil’igent hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that pioneer’d the road to Orient-land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Géntoo Monarch forth he fares to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that with dismissal he may wend his ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeing already how the Moor’s black mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">would baulk his heart’s desire by long delays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The King, who if by tales of forgèd kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">amazèd were, ’twould not so much amaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>confiding fully in his Augurs’ troth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>confirmèd too by Moormen’s wordy froth:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Feels Fear a-freezing his ignoble breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Burneth on other hand a base desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which ever held his spirit in arrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">flaming with Lucre-lust’s unquench’able Fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The richest profit sees he manifest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">appear in future, if with truth entire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he make just contract and its cons’equent gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for long years offered by our Lusian Reign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hereon the counc’illors whom the King most prizèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">different counsels and opinions dealt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for those whereby he wont to be advisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">money’s almighty magick might had felt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To call our valiant Captain he devisèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and him when come thus spake:⁠—“Now, an thou wilt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>here in my presence own the nude clean truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thy felon actions still shall claim my ruth:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The message, say they and I understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy King hath sent me, is a falsehood vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no King doth own thee, ownest thou no land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but leadest vaguing life upon the Main:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Say! who from ultimate Hispanian strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or King or Lord past hope of cure insane</span>
					<br/>
					<span>would send his navies or one ship to stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>over such distant Ocean’s dubious way?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And if great wealthy kingdoms doth thy King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sway, as thou say’est with kingly majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what rich rare presents do I see thee bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">earnests of doubtful unknown verity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The splendid robe, the costly offering</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">betwixt high King and King link amity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hold no valid sign, no certain pledge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the pleas a vagrant seaman may allege.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“If as hath hapt to many a high-born Brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">perchance in exile be your lot to roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my land shall lend you refuge and shall save;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for ev’ery country is the strong man’s home:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If ye be Pyrats housed upon the wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">own it me, fear nor infamy nor doom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for in all ages life to save must be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the primal law of life’s necessity.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He thus: The Gama, who divin’d the game</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">perfidious, with a cunning treason play’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by jealous Muhammadick hearts, whence came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the foul suspicions which the King misled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With high-soul’d confidence, as did beseem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">commanding credence which he merited,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bowing to Venus Acidalia’s hest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>proffered this answer from his prudent breast:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“If man’s orig’inal Sin in hoary Time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereby sore fall became our hapless fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">had never caused the cup of deadly crime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that cruel scourge of every Christian state⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with enmity to brim in every clime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Adam’s sons with falsity innate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(O King sublime!) of that foul turpid sect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ne’er hadst thou held me of such deed suspect.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But, sithence nought is won or good or high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sans stumbling-blocks, and sees each nobler deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on fair Hope’s footstep Fear aye following nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which on its bosom-sweat delights to feed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">meseems thou deignest little to rely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on this my very truth, nor takest heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of other reasons, which regard thou must</span>
					<br/>
					<span>didst thou not trust to men unworthy trust.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For, an I be a Robber rapine-fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">undivagous, far banisht from mine own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how can I, thinkest thou, so far have sped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to seek these seats unseen, these realms unknown?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By what false Hope, what love of profit led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">should I ’mid angry seas my lot have thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Antarctick rigours and the fires of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which they who dwell beneath the Ram must bear?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“If thou demand that gifts of high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">must the good credit of my words maintain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I came but stranger climes and skies to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Nature chose to set thine ancient reign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But if my Fortune grant such good to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">home to return and Fatherland regain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By rich and splendid presents thou shalt learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the ’assurèd tidings of my glad return.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“If this my visit Chance inop’inate seem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that King should send from far Hesperian strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">know that yon noble heart and bosom deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no geste, no poss’ible feat too great and grand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Well seems it fitting, that the thought supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Lusian spirit should at least command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>larger belief and faith of loft’ier flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and hold it boundless in its height and might.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Know that long ages passèd, since our old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Kings with a settled purpose ’gan propose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to conquer toils and travails manifold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which aye to noble plans their pow’er oppose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They opèd hostile seas that fain withhold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from mortal man the boon of soft repose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they willed to trace their bounds, to track their shore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the farthest margent where their billows roar.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Conceit right worthy of his branch so blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that vent’urous King,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> who plowed in primal rank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the waves and drave from out his well-loved nest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the last possessor of Mount Ab’yla’s flank:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He by rare Genius, toils that never rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unto one plank conjoining other plank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>disclosed the parts, where shine in clearest air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Argo with Hydra, Ara with the Hare.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“These early seeds abundant harvest bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and waxt our bosoms braver till we came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">little by little stranger paths t’ explore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">devel’oping each an antecedent aim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The latest dwellers on the Blackmoor shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Austral, whose eyne ne’er saw the Sev’enfold Flame,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>were seen by us when left behind in turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whatever peoples ’neath the Tropick burn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus with firm bosom, fixt resolve to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we vanquisht Fortune and we snatcht the prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till harbour’d this thy new-found kingdom in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we taught the crowning Column here to rise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cleaving perforce clean through the liquid tin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">horrible Tempests’ importunities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to thee we come, and only pray from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>some sign and signal which our King shall see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This, King, be truth: Nor deem that I would make⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for such uncertain good, such petty gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which, b’eing my words untrue, mote be the stake⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such long proëmium forgèd, false and vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Liefer would I my rest unending take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on the fierce restless bosom of the Main</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by mother Thetis rockt, a Pyrat dour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who makes his wealth by making others poor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“If then, Oh King! this honest truth of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou take for what it is, one-fold, sincere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">aid us, to our despatch thy heart incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and gust of glad return to mar forbear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But an my tale appear some feigned design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">heed thou my pleadings proved so fair and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as seen by Judgment-lights that never fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for Truth is strong and Truth shall aye prevail.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Th’ attentive Monarch felt assured content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when thus Da Gama provèd his discourse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Conceives in him reliance confident,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and the firm trust that lent his language force:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He weighs of every word the full intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pond’ering the pleading from such trusty source;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and ’gins to hold as men by self deceivèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>those caitiff Cat’uals who had bribes receivèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Jointly his lucre-lust claims firm effect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which Lusian contract shall he hopes ensure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hope bids him listen, and far more affect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Captain’s honour than the crafty Moor:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In fine he biddeth Gama hie direct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">aboard, and thence from hurt and harm secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the fittest stuffs for traffick shoreward send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>against his spicey stores to truck or vend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The stuffs to send, in fine, he gives command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which in Gangetick realms the rarest be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if aught of value brought he from the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where ends the shore and where begins the sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now from the Royal presence venerand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Captain seeks the port to make his plea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>before the Cat’ual honored with his charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for loan of boat as his were all at large.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For boat whereby to board his ship he pleadeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet the bad Regent plotting novel snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein to ’trap the stranger, nought concedeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but stay and hindrance straightway doth prepare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, faring from the quay, his Guest he leadeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far from the royal Palaces; and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where kens the Monarch nought of such intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>would work the mischief which his malice meant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When reached the distant site, he ’gan to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fitting conveyance should be soon supplied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or to the dawning of the crastine day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the passage to defer he best decide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But now perceivèd from prolonged delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Gama how the Géntoo was allied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with the deep-plotting Moors’ revengeful brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a truth he had not hereto understood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This Cat’ual also gifts and bribes had tane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">tempted like others by the Muslim folk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">eke was he chief who held the guiding rein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of all the cities ’neath the Samo’rim’s yoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From him alone the Moormen looked to gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their base and wicked wills by hook or crook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He, who in concert vile with them conspires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>despaireth not to glut their ill desires.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To him the Gama with much instance prays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for passage shipward, but without avail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for thus had order given, as he says,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the proud successor of the Perimal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“What cause of hindrance here, why these delays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to land the stuffs and goods of Portugal?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subjects perforce obey what Kings command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who dares their dreadful orders countermand?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That bribed Cat’ual lent no heed as due</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to the high words; nay more he rackt his thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to find some subtle fantasy and new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">some deep and devilish scheme, some monstr’ous plot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or how his brutal steel he might imbrue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in that detested blood he ever sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>or how the vessels he might blast and burn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that none and nought therein may home return.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That none to Fatherland return intendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and nothing less, the Muslims’ fiendish plan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so ne’er shall ken how far and wide extendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Th’ Eöan land our sovran Lusitan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In fine goes not the Gama whom forfendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of those barbarian hordes the ruling man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lacking whose permit none might leave the beach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as all the boats were borne beyond his reach.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To the Chief’s reasons and rough words replieth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that Idol-worshipper, he must command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to bring near shore the Fleet that distant lieth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so mote it easier be to board and land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Of foe or thief the tactick it implieth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when in far offing thus the vessels stand,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>quoth he, “for ne’er shall true and trusty friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from those he loveth danger apprehend.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Shrewd Gama seeth in each wily word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Cat’ual’s drift, who fain would bring the Fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nearer, where dire assault of flame and sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">were ready made for wreaking mortal hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His thoughts he scatters better aid t’ afford:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He seeks in Fancy’s realm some cure discreet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>some counterplot ’gainst evil plans preparèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in fine he fearèd all, for all he carèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As beam reflected by the burnisht bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mirror of steel, or glass-plate crystal-clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which sometime struck by ray of solar light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in other part re-strikes the dazzling glare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and waved by wanton hand of curious Spright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">about the house to sparkle here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>o’er walls and roofs the shimm’ering species plays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor rest its trem’ulous, fitful, quiv’ering rays.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-88">
				<header>
					<p>88</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So did his vaguing judgment fluctuate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when captive Gama’s mem’ory brought to mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Coelho, lest he peradventure wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ashore with boats as by command design’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With message priv’ily sent he warned his mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fast for the Fleet his homeward way to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lest he fall lightly in the bitter lace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he feared, the fierce fell work of Moorish race.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-89">
				<header>
					<p>89</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such should be he who would, by grace of Mart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">follow th’ illustrious and their fame outvie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His nimble thought must fly to every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">see through, and ’scape the danger ere ’tis nigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His soldier-instinct rare, and subtle art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">must read, mark, learn his baffled enemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>note all in fine; nor shall that Captain’s lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>be praise of mine, who pleads <em>I thought it not!</em></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-90">
				<header>
					<p>90</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Insists the Malabar his guest remain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pris’oner, till orders bring th’ Armada near;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he constant, firèd with hot high disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hears eve’ry menace with unfrighten’d ear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rather shall he the weight on self sustain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which vilest malice born of hate and fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>machinates, than to shade of risk expose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his Liege’s navy riding safe from foes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-91">
				<header>
					<p>91</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That livelong night in durance vile he lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and of next day a part, when he ordains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">once more to see the King: But leave denies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Guard that not a few of men contains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To tempt with other tricks the Géntoo tries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fearing his Monarch pay him for his pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when shown the malice which must soon be known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>if there a longer time the stranger wone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-92">
				<header>
					<p>92</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He bids him order ev’ery stuff be brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">straight shoreward, all he hath of vendible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that they might duly barter’d be or bought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for who nills commerce war is wont to will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Though knows the Gama what felonious thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and damnable desires that bosom fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yet he consenteth, for right well knows he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with these same stuffs he buys his liberty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-93">
				<header>
					<p>93</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Concert they now the Blackmoor shall prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">launches and lighters fit the wares to land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to trust his boats our Captain did not care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where fone might capture or might hold in hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Put forth th’ almádies for the beach to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hispanian stuffs, the best he mote command:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He writes his brother fearing all delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to send the bales that shall his blackmail pay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-94">
				<header>
					<p>94</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The merchandise now landed is ashore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where by that greedy Catual ’tis tane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alvaro and Diogo guard the store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with leave to truck or vend as best they can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That more than duty, than obedience more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gain rules th’ ignoble breast of lawless man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>well doth that Pagan to the worldling show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for gained the goods he let the Gama go:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-95">
				<header>
					<p>95</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He lets him go, for in the goods he thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to hold sufficient pledge and pawn that may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a better penny to his purse be brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">than if for longer time our Chief he stay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Gama, certain that no more he ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to land, and haply ’counter fresh delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and to his vessels being now restor’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>resolves with tranquil mind to bide aboard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-96">
				<header>
					<p>96</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aboard the ships he bides with mind at ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till seen what circumstance the days shall show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for now his spirit no reliance sees</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon that bribèd Regent vile and low.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here let the Casuist who riddle rees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">see how the wealthy as the wantful too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>are ruled by lucre and the noxious thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of gain that gars us dare and do the worst.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-97">
				<header>
					<p>97</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By Thracia’s Sovran Polydore is slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">only to have and hold his wealthy store;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the guarded edifice may not contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Acrisius’ daughter ’gainst the golden shower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so raged Tarpeia’s avarice insane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that she in truck for shining yellow ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the lofty towers to the foe betrayeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and stifled, crusht, the price of treason payeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-98">
				<header>
					<p>98</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This opes of warded Fort the valvarte-wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">maketh the felon friend his faith forego:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This changeth noblest Thane to vilest Thrall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and yieldeth Captains to the luring foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This maketh purest maiden foully fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and know no fear, no reck of Honour trow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Art and Science shall at times deprave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>blind sanest judgment, consciences enslave:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-99">
				<header>
					<p>99</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This loves to gloss with subtler sense than meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Texts: This maketh Laws and Laws unmaketh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This tainteth subjects with a traitor-taint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This in the patriot King the tyrant waketh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">E’en he, self-vowèd to th’ Omnipotent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as proved by thousand instances, forsaketh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s way by Gold’s enchanting Siren woo’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yet haply showing still some tint of good.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
