<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Da Gama pursueth his discourse with the King of Melinde, and relateth the wars between Portugal and Castile, touching the succession to the throne, after the death of the king, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.</abbr> Fernando: Military feats of the Constable, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.</abbr> Nuno Alvares Pereira: Battle and victory of Aljubarrota: Diligent attempts to discover India by land, in the days of the king <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.</abbr> Joam <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>: How the king <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.</abbr> Manoel gained this end by resolving upon the present voyage: Preparations for it: Embarkation and farewells of the navigators upon the Belem beach.</p>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Joam acclaimèd to be Pedro’s heir, (1⁠–⁠5)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Léonor craveth aidance of Castile: (6⁠–⁠13)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Withstandeth Nuno, warrior sans fear, (14⁠–⁠22)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They fight; and conquest crowns the Lusian’s weal: (23⁠–⁠47)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who first went forth the Morning-land to spere (60⁠–⁠66)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And through the tumid flood his way to feel;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And how to Gama fell the great emprize, (77⁠–⁠End)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To gar our Port’ugal’s glory higher rise.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-4-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“After the horrors of the stormy Night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with gloom, and lightning-gleams, and hiss of wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">breaks lovely Morning’s pure and blessèd light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with hope of haven and sure rest to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sol banisheth the dark obscure from sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">laying the terror of man’s timid mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to the doughty kingdom it befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when King Fernando bade this world farewell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For, if so many with such hopes were firèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for one whose potent arm their harms could pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on those, that wrought their wrongs with soul untirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nerved by Fernando’s heedless, feeble way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in shortest time it happed as they desirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when ever-glorious John arose to sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the only heir that did from Pedro spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and (though a bastard) every inch a King.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“That such accession came from Heaven divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">proved ’special marvels, God His truth proclaiming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when Ev’ora city saw the choicest sign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a babe of age unspeech’d the ruler naming;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, but to show the Heav’en’s supreme design,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she raised her cradled limbs and voice, exclaiming⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Portugal! Port’ugal!’ high uplifting hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘for the new king, Dom John, who rules the land.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Changèd in sprite were all within the Reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">old hatreds firing hearts with novel flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">absolute cruelties none cared restrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">popular Fury dealt to whence it came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Soon are the friends and kith and kinsmen slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the adult’erous County and the Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with whom incont’inent love and lust unblest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the wappen’d widow showèd manifest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But he, dishonour’d and with cause, at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by cold white weapon falls before her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and with him many to destruction past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for flame so kindled all consuming flies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This, like Astyanax, is headlong cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from the tall steeple (’spite his dignities);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whom orders, altar, honours, nought avail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>those through the highways torn and stript they trail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now long Oblivion veils the deeds accurst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of mortal fierceness, such as Rome beheld,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">done by fierce Marius, or the bloody thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Sylla, when parforce his foe expel’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus Léonor, who mortal vengeance nurst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for her dead County gars, with fury swell’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Castilia’s force on Lusitania fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>calling her daughter heir of Portugal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Beatrice was the daughter, interwed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the Castilian, who for kingship greedeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">putative offspring of Fernando’s bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if evil Fame so much to her concedeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hearing the voice, Castile high raiseth head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and saith this daughter to her sire succeedeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for warfare must’ereth she her warrior bands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from various regions and from various lands.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“They flock from all the Province, by one Brigo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(if such man ever was) yclept of yore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and lands by Ferd’inand won, and Cid Rodrigo</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from the tyrannick gov’ernance of the Moor.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Little in fear of warlike feat doth he go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who with hard plowshare cleaving lordeth o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the champaign Leonèze, and boasts to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the blight and bane of Moorish chivalry.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In Valour’s ancient fame the Vandal host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">confident still and stubborn, ’gan appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from all Andalusía’s head and boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">laved by thy crystal wave, Guadalquivir!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the noble Island<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> eke, whilere the post</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Tyrian strangers, to the war drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bringing insignia by renown well known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hercules’ Pillars on their pennons shown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Eke come they trooping from Toledo’s reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">City of noble, ancient or’igin, span’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Tagus circling with his sweet glad vein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that bursts and pours from Conca’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> mountain-land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">You also, you, all craven fear disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sordid Gallegos! hard and canny band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for stern resistance fast to arms ye flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>warding their doughty blows whose weight ye knew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Eke War’s black Furies hurried to the fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fierce Biscayan folk, who clean despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all polisht reasons, and ne wrong ne slight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of stranger races bear in patient guise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Asturias-land and that Guipusc’oan hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">proud of the mine which iron ore supplies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with it their haughty sworders armed and made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ready their rightful lords i’ the war to aid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“John in whose bosom Peril only grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the strength Jew Sampson borrow’d of his hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">though all he hath be few to fight his foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet bids his few for battle-gage prepare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, not that counsel fails when danger shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with his chief lords he counsels on th’ affair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but drift of inner thoughts he seeks and finds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for ’mid the many there be many minds.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor lack their reas’onings who would disconcert</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">opinions firmly fixt in pop’ular will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose weal of ancient valour is convèrt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to an unusèd and disloyal ill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Men in whose hearts Fear, gelid and inert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">reigneth, which faith and truth were wont to fill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deny they King and Country; and, if tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they had (as Peter did) their God denied.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But ne’er did such denial-sin appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in noble Nuno Alv’ares, nay, instead⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">although his brothers show’d default so clear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he fiercely chid the fickle hearts misled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and to the lieges steeped in doubt and fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with phrase more forceful than fine-drawn he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>too fere for facund, as he bared his glave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>threating Earth, seas, and sphere with ban and brave:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘What! ’mid the noble sons of Portugale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that nills to strike for freedom beats a heart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What! in this province which the nations all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">crowned War’s princess in ev’ery earthly part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">breathes, who his aid denies, such nid’ering thrall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">renaying faith and love, and force and art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Portingall; and, be whate’er the cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>would see his country keep the stranger’s laws?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘What! flows not still within your veins the blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the brave soldiers who ’neath banners borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by great Henriques<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a> fierce with hero-mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this valiant race in war did ever scorn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When tane so many banners, and withstood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so many foemen, who such losses mourn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that seven noble Yarls were forced to yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their swords besides the spoils that strewed the field?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Say you, by whom were alway trodden down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">these, now who seem to tread adown on you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Diniz and his son of high renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">save by your sires’ and grandsires’ derring-do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then if by sin or sore neglect o’erthrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so could your olden force Fernand undo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to you fresh forces this new King shall bring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>an it be sooth that Subjects change with King.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Such King ye have, that an ye courage have</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">equal his kingly heart ye raised to reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all en’emies shall ye rout so be ye brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">much more the routed, eath to rout again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But an such noble thought no more may save</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">your souls from pen’etrant Fear to bosom tane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the craven hands of seely terrors tie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>this stranger’s yoke I, only I, defy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘I with my vassals only, and my brand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(this said, his dreadful blade he bared mid-way)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against the high and hostile force will stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that threats a kingdom strange to stranger sway:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By virtue of my Liege, my mourning Land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Loyalty denied by you this day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll conquer all, not only these my foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but whatsoever durst my King oppose.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“E’en as the Youths who ’scaping Cannae-field⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">its only remnants⁠—to Canusium fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">despairing, and well-nigh disposed to yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and hail the Carthaginian vict’ory-led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the young Cornelius to their faith appeal’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and took his comrades’ oath upon his blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Roman arms t’ uphold as long as life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hold, or hath pow’er to ’scape the mortal strife:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Forceth the Folk enforcèd in such wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nuno, and when his final words they hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">th’ ice-cold and sullen humour sudden flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that curdled spirits with a coward fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To mount the beast Neptunian all arise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">charging and tossing high the lance and spear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they run and shout with open-mouthèd glee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Long live the famous King who sets us free!’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“O’ the pop’ular classes not a few approve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the War their natal land and home sustains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These fare to furbish armours, and remove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">injurious rust, of Peace the biting stains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they quilt their morions, plates for breast they prove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">each arms himself e’en as his fancy fain ’s;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while those on coats with thousand colours bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the signs and symbols of their loves indite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With all this lustrous Company enrol’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from fresh Abrantès sallies John the Brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Abrantès, fed by many a fountain cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Tagus rolling sweet abundant wave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The vanguard-knights commands that warrior bold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Nature fittest made command to have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of th’ Oriental hordes withouten count,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherewith Sir Xerxes crost the Hellespont:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I say Don Nuno, who appearèd here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the proudest scourger of that prideful Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as was in olden days the Hun so fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">curse of the Frankish, of Italian men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Followed another far-famed cavalier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who led the dexter phalanx Lusitane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>apt to dispose them, prompt to lead his fellows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mem Rodrigues they call de Vasconcéllos.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“While of the Knights in corresponding flank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Antám Vasqués d’Almáda hath command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to Avranches’ Earldom rose anon his rank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who holds the Lusian host’s sinistral hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor far the banner from men’s notice shrank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in rear, where Cinques by Castles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> bordered stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with John the King, who shows a front so dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en Mars must learn to hide his ’minished head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Linèd the rempart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a> groups of trembling fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom hopes and fears alternate heat and freeze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mothers and sisters, wives and brides in pray’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with fasts and pilgrim-vows the Heav’ens to please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And now the Squadrons wont the war to dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">affront the serrièd hosts of enemies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who meet this onset with a mighty shout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while all are whelmed in dreadful direful doubt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Messenger-trumpets to the cries reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and sibilant fife, and drum, and atambor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while Ancients wave their flags, and banners fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with many-colour’d legends ’broidered o’er.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Twas fruity August when the days be dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Ceres heaps the peasant’s threshing-floor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>August, when Sol Astraea’s mansion reigneth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>and the sweet must of grapes Lyaeus straineth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Sudden Castilia’s trump the signal gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">horribly fearful, sounding tem’erous dread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Heard it the Hill Artábrus;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> and his wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Guadiana rollèd backwards as he fled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O’er Douro and Transtagan lands it drave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tagus sore agitated seaward sped;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while mothers trembling at the terr’ible storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>embraced with tighter arm each tiny form.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“How many faces there wan waxt and white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose fainting hearts the friendly life-blood cheerèd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For in dire danger Fear hath more of might⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fear of danger⁠—than the danger fearèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If not, it seemeth so; when rage of fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">man’s sprite to quell or kill the foe hath stirrèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>it makes him all unheed how high the cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>were loss of limb, or dear life rashly lost.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Battle’s uncertain work begins; and move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">right wings on either part to take the plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">these fighting to defend the land they love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those eggèd on by hope that land to gain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Soon great Pereira, who would foremost prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the knightly valour of his noble strain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>charges and shocks, and strews the field till sown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with those who covet what is not their own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now in the dust-blurred air with strident sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bolts, arrows, darts and man’ifold missiles fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">beneath the destrier’s horny hoof the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">quaketh in terror, and the dales reply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shiver the lances; thundereth around</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the frequent crash of fellèd armoury;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>foes on the little force redoubling fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Nuno fierce, who makes great numbers small.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See! there his brethren meet him in the fray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(Fierce chance and cruel case!) But dreads he nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">right little were it brother-foe to slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who against King and Country trait’orous fought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Amid these ren’egades not a few that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">war in the foremost squadrons fury-fraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>against their brethren and their kin (sad Fate!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as in great Julius’ warfare with the Great.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“O thou, Sertorius! O great Coriolane!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Catiline! all ye hosts of bygone age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who ’gainst your Fatherland with hearts profane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ragèd with rav’ening parricidal rage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if where Sumánus holds his dismal reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">most dreadful torments must your sin assuage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>tell him, that e’en our Portugal sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>suckled some traitors guilty of your crimes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here doth the foremost of our lines give way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so many foemen have its force opprest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There standeth Nuno, brave as Ly’on at bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Africk Ceita rears her hilly crest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who sees the ’circling troop of cavalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">over the Tetu’an plain to chase addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and raging as they couch the deadly spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>seems somewhat stirred, but hides all craven fear:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With sidelong glance he sights them, but his spleen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ferine forbids the King of Beasts to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a craven back; nay, rather on the screen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of plumping lances leaps he as they grow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So stands our Knight, who stains and soils the green</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with alien gore-streams: On that field lie low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>some of his own; howe’er with valour dowerèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hearts lose their virtue by such odds o’erpowerèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“John felt the danger and the dure affront</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Nuno; straight like Captain wise and ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he rushed afield, viewed all, and in the brunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with words and works taught men fresh deeds to dare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As nursing Ly’oness, fere and fierce of front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who, left for chase her whelps secure in lair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>findeth while for’aging for their wonted food</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Massylian<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a> hind hath dared to rob her brood:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Runs, frantick raging, while her roar and moan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">make the Seven-Brother Mountains<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a> shake and rave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">So John with other chosen troop hath flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">foeward his dexter wing t’ enforce and save:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Oh strong Companions! Souls of high renown!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cavaliers braver than what men hold brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>strike for your country! now all earthly chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all hope of Liberty is on your lance!’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Behold me here, your Comrade and your King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who ’mid the spear and harness, bolt and bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">foremost I charge and first myself I fling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">smite, ye true Portughuese, deal yet one blow!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus spake that great-soul’d Warrior, brandishing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">four times his lance before the final throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, thrusting forceful, by that single thrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lanceth such wounds that many bite the dust.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For, see, his soldiers brent with ardour new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">honoured repentance, honourable fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who shall display most courage staid and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and dare the dangers dealt by Mars his ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">contend: The steel that catcheth flamey hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">aims first at plate, then at the breast aims higher;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thus, wounds they give and wounds they take again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, dealing Death, in Death they feel no pain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Many are sent to sight the Stygian wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">into whose bodies entered iron Death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here dieth Sanct’ Iágo’s Master brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who fought with fiercest sprite till latest breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">another Master dire of Calatrave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">horrid in cruel havock, perisheth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eke the Pereiras foully renegate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>die God denying and denouncing Fate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of the vile, nameless Vulgar many bleed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">flitting with Gentles to the Gulf profound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where hungers, rav’ening with eternal greed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for passing human Shades the three-head Hound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And humbling more that haughty, arr’ogant breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and better taming enemies furibund,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Castilia’s Gonfanon sublime must fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>beneath the forceful foot of Portugall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<br/>
					<span>“Here<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a> wildest Battle hath its cruel’est will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with deaths and shouts, and slash and gory shower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the multitud’inous Braves, who’re killed and kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rob of their proper hues the bloom and flower:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">At length they fly! they die! now waxeth still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">War’s note, while lance and spear have lost their power:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Castilia’s King the fate of pride must own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>seeing his purpose changed, his host o’erthrown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The field he leaveth to the Conqueror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">too glad his life had not been left in fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Follow him all who can; and panick sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lends them not feet, but feather’d wings for flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their breasts are fillèd with a wild doloùr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Deaths, for Treasure waste in wanton plight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for woe, disgust, and foul dishonour’s soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to see the Victor rev’elling in their spoil.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Some fly with furious curses, and blaspheme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">him who the World with Warfare made accurst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">others that cov’etous breast all culp’able deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Greed enquicken’d by his selfish thirst.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That, alien wealth to win, with sore extreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he plunged his hapless folk in woes the worst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>leaving so many wives and mothers, lorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of sons and spouses, evermore to mourn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Campèd our conqu’ering John the ’customed days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on foughten field, in glory of the brave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then with vowed pilgrimage, gift, pray’er, and praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he gave Him graces who such vict’ory gave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But Nuno, willing not by peaceful ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on human memory his name to ’grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>but by his sovran feats of war, commands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his men pass over to Transtágan lands.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“His gallant project favoureth Destiny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">making effect commensurate with cause;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Lands that bordered by the Vandals lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yielding their treasures bow before his laws:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now Baetic banners which Seville o’erfly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and flags of various princes, without pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all trail foot-trampled; naught their force availeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whate’er the forceful Portingall assaileth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“By these and other Victories opprest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Castilia’s lieges long deplored their woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when Peace by all desired and gentle Rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to grant their vanquisht fone the Victors chose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then seemed it good to His almighty hest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that the contending Sovrans should espouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>two royal Damsels born of English race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Princesses famed for honour, form, and grace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nills the brave bosom, used to bloody broil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the lack of foeman who his force shall dree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and thus, Earth holding none to slay and spoil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he carries conquest o’er the unconquer’d Sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">First of our Kings is he who left the soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">patrial, teaching Africk’s Paynimry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by dint of arms, how much in word and deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Laws of <strong>Christ</strong> Mafamed’s laws exceed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See! thousand swimming Birds the silv’ery plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Thetis cleave, and spurn her fume and fret,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with bellied wings to seize the wind they strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where his extremest mete Alcides set:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Mount Abyla, and dight with tow’er and fane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ceita, they seize, ignoble Mahomet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they oust: and thus our gen’eral Spain secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from Julian-craft,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a> disloyal and impure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Death granted not to Portugal’s desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hero so happy long should wear the crown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but soon th’ angelick Host and heav’enly Choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a home in highest Heaven made his own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To ward his Lusia, and to raise her higher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He who withdrew him left the goodly boon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>building our country on her broadest base⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of noble Infants a right royal Race.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Noways so happy was Duarte’s fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what while he rose the royal rank to fill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus troublous Time doth ever alternate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pleasure with pain, and temper good with ill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What man hath lived through life in joyous state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who firmness finds in Fortune’s fickle will?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet to this Kingdom and this King she deignèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>spare the vicissitudes her laws ordainèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Captive he saw his brother, hight Fernand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Saint aspiring high with purpose brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who as a hostage in the Sara’cen’s hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">betrayed himself his ’leaguer’d host to save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He lived for purest faith to Fatherland</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the life of noble Ladye sold a slave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lest bought with price of Ceita’s potent town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to public welfare be preferred his own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Codrus, lest foemen conquer, freely chose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to yield his life and, conqu’ering self, to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Regulus, lest his land in aught should lose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lost for all time all hopes of liberty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this, that Hispania might in peace repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">chose lifelong thrall, eterne captivity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Codrus nor Curtius with man’s awe for meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor loyal Decii ever dared such deed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Afonso, now his kingdom’s only heir⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a name of Vict’ory on our Spanish strand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who, the haught fierceness of the Moor’s frontier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to lowest mis’ery tamed with mighty hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pardie, had been a peerless cavalier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">had he not lusted after Ebro-land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still shall Africk say, ’twere hopeless feat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on battle-plain such terr’ible King to beat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This could pluck Golden Apples from the bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which only he in Tiryns born could pluck:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He yoked the salvage Moor, and even now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the salvage Moorman’s neck must bear his yoke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Still palms and greeny bays begird his brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">won from the barb’arous raging hosts that flock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alcacèr’s fortèd town with arms to guard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tangier the pop’ulous, and Arzille the hard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“All these by gallant deeds, in fine, were gainèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and low lay ev’ery diamantine wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">anent the Portingalls, now taught and trainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to throw the Pow’er that lists to try a fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Such extreme marvels by strong arms attainèd⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">right worthy el’oquent scripture one and all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the gallant Cavaliers, whose Gestes of glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>added a lustre to our Lusian story.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But soon, ambition-madded, goaded on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Passion of Dominion bitter-sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he falls on Ferdinand of Aragon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Castile’s haught kingdom hoping to defeat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The swarming hostile crowds their armour don,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the proud and various races troop and meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from Cadiz fast to tow’ering Pyrenee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who bow to Ferdinand the neck and knee.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Scornèd an idler in the realm to rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the youthful John; who taketh early heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to aid his greedy father with his best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and sooth, came th’ aidance at the hour of need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Issued from bloody battle’s terr’ible test</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with brow unmoved, serene in word and deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>maugre defeat, the Sire, that man of blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while ’twixt the rivals Vict’ory doubtful stood:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For-that of valiant princely vein his son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a gentle, stalwart, right magnan’imous Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when to th’ opponents he such harm had done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">one whole day campèd on the field of fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus from Octavian<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a> was the vict’ory won,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while Anthony, his mate, was Victor hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when they the murth’erers who the Caesar slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>upon Philippi-field the deed made rue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But as thro’ gathered shades of Night eterne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Afonso sped to realms of endless joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Prince who rose to rule our realm in turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was John the Second and the thirteenth Roy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This, never-dying Glory’s meed to earn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">higher than ventured mortal man to fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ventured; who sought those bounds of ruddy Morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which I go seeking, this my voyage-bourne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Envoys commiss’ioneth he, who passing o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hispania, Gaul, and honoured Italy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">took ship in haven of th’ illustrious shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where erst inhumèd lay Parthenopè;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Naples, whose Dest’iny was decreed of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the var’ious stranger’s slave and thrall to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and rise in honour when her years are full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by sovereign Hispania’s noble rule.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“They cleave the bright blue waves of Sic’ulan deeps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by sandy marge of Rhodos-isle they go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and thence debark they where the cliffy steeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are still enfam’d for Magnus here lain low:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To Memphis wend they, and the land that reaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">crops which fat Nylus’ flood doth overflow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and climb ’yond Egypt to those Aethiop heights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where men conserve <strong>Christ’s</strong> high and holy rites.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And eke they pass the waters Erythréan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where past the shipless peoples Israelite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">remain arear the ranges Nabathéan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which by the name of Ishmael’s seed are hight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Those odoriferous incense-coasts Sabaean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dainty Adonis’ Mother’s dear delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they round, and all of Happy Ar’aby known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>leaving the Waste of Sand and Reign of Stone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“They push where still preserveth Persic Strait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">confusèd Babel’s darkling memory;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there, where the Tygre blendeth with Euphràte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which from their head-streams hold their heads so high.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thence fare they his pure stream to find, whose fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’twill be to deal such length of history,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indus, and cross that breadth of Ocean-bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where daring Trajan never darèd tread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Strange tribes they saw, and through wild peoples past</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Gedrosian, and Carmanian, and of Inde;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeing the various custom, various caste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which ev’ery Region beareth in her kind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But from such asp’erous ways, such voyage vast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">man finds not facile safe return to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fine, there died they and to natal shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to home, sweet home, returned they nevermore.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Reserved, meseemeth, Heav’en’s clear-sighting will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Man’oel, worthy of such goodly meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this arduous task, and stirred him onward still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to stirring action and illustrious deed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Man’oel, who rose the throne of John to fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and to his high resolves did eke succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>forthwith when taken of his realm the charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>took up the conquest of the Ocean large:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The same, as one obliged by a noble Thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the debt of Honour left as ’heritance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by predecessors, (who in life aye fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their own dear land’s best interests to advance)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne’er for a moment failèd of his fraught⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Obligement;⁠—at what hour Day’s radiance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pales, and the nitid Stars on high that rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with falling courses woo man’s sleep-worn eyes;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Already being on bed of gold recline’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Fancy worketh with prophetick strain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">revolving matters in his restless mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the bounden duties of his race and reign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sleep, soft restorer, comes his eyne to bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while thought and mem’ory both unbound remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for, as his weary lids sweet slumber sealeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morpheus in varied forms himself revealeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here seems the King so high to soar away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that touched his head the nearest primal Sphere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where worlds of vision ’neath his glances lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nations of vasty numbers, strange and fere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and there right near the birthplace of the Day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unto his outstretched eyne began appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from distant, olden, cloud-compelling mountains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>flowing, a twain of high, deep, limpid fountains.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Birds of the feral kind, and kine, and flocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’bode in the shadows of the shaggy wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A thousand herbs and trees with gnarled stocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">barring the paths of passing mortals stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Adverse had ever been those mountain-rocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to human intercourse, and clearly show’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>never since Adam sinned against our days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>brake foot of man this breadth of bosky maze.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“From out the Fountains seemed he to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for him inclining, with long hasty stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">two Men, who showèd old and very old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of aspect rustick yet with lordly pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Adown their twistèd pointed locks slow roll’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gouts which their bodies bathed on ev’ery side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the skin of earthy texture, dark and dull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the beard hirsute, unshorn, but long and full.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“These hoary Fathers round their foreheads bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">tree-boughs, with unknown shrub and herb entwine’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and one a worn and wearied aspect wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as though from regions lying far behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And thus his waters which did slower pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seemèd adown the further side to wind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>E’en thus Alpheus from Arcádia fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to Syracuse and Arethusa’s bed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This, who with graver gait and gesture came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thus from a distance to the Monarch crieth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘O thou! whose sceptre and whose crown shall claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Earth a mighty part that guarded lieth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we twain, who fly through mouths of men by Fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we, whose untamèd neck man’s yoke defieth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>warn thee, O King! ’tis time to send commands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and raise large tribute from our natal lands.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Illustrious Gange am I, whose farthest fount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in realms celestial, heav’enly heights, I trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And yon stands Indus, King, who on the mount</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which thou regardest, hath of birth his place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou shalt hard warfare wage on our account;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but, still insisting ev’ery fear to face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with ne’er seen conquests, and sans soil or stain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the tribes thou viewest thou shalt curb and rein.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“No more that holy noble River said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">both in a moment fade and disappear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Awaketh Manoel in novel dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and big o’erchargèd thoughts ybred of fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Meanwhile his glitt’ering mantle Phoebus spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon the sombre somn’olent hemisphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dawn comes and o’er the gloomy welkin showers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>blushings of modest rose, and fiery flowers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The King in counsel calls his lords to meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and of the vision’d figures news imparts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the holy Elder’s words he doth repeat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which with a mighty marvel heaves their hearts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">All straight resolve t’ equip a sturdy fleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that men, well skilled in navigator-arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>should cut the stubborn Main and forth should fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in search of novel climes and novel air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I, who right little deemed, forsooth, to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">myself attaining hopes my Sprite desirèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet mighty matters of such cunning kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my heart presaging promised and inspirèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en now ken not, or how or why design’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or for what happy chance in me admirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that famous Monarch chose me, gave to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of this grave, gracious enterprise the key.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And with fair offer coucht in courteous phrase⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lordly command obliging more than laws⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he said: ‘In exploits dure and daring ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who woo most perils win the most applause:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Riskt life enfameth man with highest praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or lost in <strong>Honour’s</strong>, not in honours’, cause;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when to blighting Fear it never bends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>short it may be, yet more its length extends.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Thee from a chosen host have chosen I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the dangers claimed by thee to undergo:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Tis heavy travail, hard, heroick, high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which love of me shall lighten, well I trow.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I could not suffer more:⁠—‘Great King!’ I cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘to face the steel-clad host, sword, lance, fire, snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for thee were thing so slight, my sole annoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is to see trivial life so vain a toy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Imagine ev’ery wildest aventure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such as Eurystheus for Alcídes plan’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cleone’s Lyon, Harpies foul and dour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Boar of Erymanth and Hydra ban’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in fine to seek those empty shades obscure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Styx surrounds of Dis the dire Dead-land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the greatest danger and the deadliest brunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for thee, O King! this soul, this flesh would front.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“His thanks and costly gifts on me bestows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the King, whose reason lauds my ready will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Valour fed on praises lives and grows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Praise is the noble Spirit’s spur and spell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">At once to share my fortunes doth propose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom friendship and fraternal love compel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor less resolved to win him name and fame, a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>dear trusty brother namèd Paul da Gama.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Eke Nicholas Coelho volunteers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">trainèd to toilsome tasks and sufferings long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">both are in valour and in counsel peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in arms experienced, and in battle strong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now choicest hands in Youthtide’s gen’erous years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lusting for Bravery’s meed around me throng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>doughty, high-mettled, as doth best become</span>
					<br/>
					<span>advent’urous manhood that would tempt such doom.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“All these by Man’oel’s hand remun’erate were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that Love through Duty might the more increase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and with high words each heart was fired to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">adventures, peradventure, sans surcease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus did the Minyae for their feat prepare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to gain the glories of the Golden Fleece⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>orac’ulous Argo-ship, that dared the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>through Euxine waves her vent’urous way to burst.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now in famed Ulysséa’s haven man’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with raptures worthy of the great design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(where his sweet liquor and his snowy sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Tagus blendeth with Neptunian brine),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ride the ships ready. Here my strong young band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by fear unbridled glad in labour join;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for those of Mars and Neptune,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a> one and all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the world would wander did I only call.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Fast by the foreshore comes the soldiery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in various colours prankt with various art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor less enforced by inner force are they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to seek and see Earth’s unexplorèd part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Round the good Navy gentle breezes play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and blithely waves each airy estandart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a> swear, far-gazing on the breadth of brine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’mid stars Olympick Argo-like to shine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“When all prepared according to this sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with what of wants such lengthy way demandeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our souls we did prepare for Death’s disport</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who before seaman’s eyne for ever standeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To the Most Highest, throned in Heaven’s court</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which He sustains, whose glance this globe commandeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that He, our guard and guide, His aidance lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>we prayed, and see our incept to its end.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thus we departed from the saintly Shrine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">built on the margent of the briny wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">named, for all mem’ory, from the Land Divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where God incarnèd came the world to save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">King! I assure thee when this mind of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rememb’ereth how ’twas ours those shores to leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>filled are my sprite and heart with doubts and fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and eyes can hardly stay their trickling tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-88">
				<header>
					<p>88</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The City-people on that saddest day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(these for their bosom-friends, and those for kin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and others but spectators) thronged the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sad and down-hearted at the dreary scene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We, winding through the virtuous array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a thousand monks and priests of rev’erend mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>praying, in solemn pageant, to the Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>afoot set forth the ready barques to board.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-89">
				<header>
					<p>89</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“On such long dubious courses sent to steer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">us deemed the people den’izens of the tomb;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the wailing women shed the piteous tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and sadly sighed the men to sight our doom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wives, sisters, mothers (most their hearts must fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose love is foremost) added to the gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despair; and shudder’d with a freezing fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lest we, their loved ones, aye be lost to sight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-90">
				<header>
					<p>90</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This, following, saith: ‘O son! I ever held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">coolth of my sorrows and the sweet relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of mine already weary way-worn eld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so soon to sink in glooms of need and grief;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">why leave me thus to want and woe compel’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why fly my love, fond child? whose days so brief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall set in darkness, and in briny grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shalt feed the fishes of the greedy wave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-91">
				<header>
					<p>91</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“That, with loosed locks: ‘O douce and dearest spouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lacking whose love Love willeth not I live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">why risk, when daring Ocean’s wrath to rouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy life, my life which is not thine to give?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How canst forget our fond fair marriage-vows?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why face the waves a homeless fugitive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our love, our vain content shall nought avail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thrown to the breezes as they blow the sail?’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-92">
				<header>
					<p>92</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With such and sim’ilar words that spake the tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of love and human nature’s yearning woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">followed our seaward path both old and young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">life’s two extremes by Time made weak and slow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sad Echo wailèd the near wolds among,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as though hard hills were movèd grief to show;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tears the snowy shore suchwise bedew’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>drops rivall’d sands in equal multitude.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-93">
				<header>
					<p>93</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of us the Company, ne’er raising eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on wife or mother, marcht in such a state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we feared our hearts fall faint, and fain we fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our fixt resolves, repenting all too late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus I determined straight aboard to hie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sans ‘Fare-thee-wells’ by custom consecrate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which, though they be dear love’s own lovely way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>redouble grief to those who go or stay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-94">
				<header>
					<p>94</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But now an agèd Sire of reverend mien,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon the foreshore throngèd by the crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with eyne fast fixt upon our forms was seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and discontented thrice his brow he bow’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His deep-toned accents raising somewhat keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that we from shipboard hear him speak aloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with lore by long experience only grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thus from his time-taught breast he made his moan:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-95">
				<header>
					<p>95</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Oh craving of Command! Oh vain Desire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of vainest van’ity man miscalleth Fame!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh fraud’ulent gust, so easy fanned to fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by breath of vulgar, aping Honour’s name!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What just and dreadful judgment deals thine ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to seely souls who overlove thy claim!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What deaths, what direful risks, what agonies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherewith thou guerd’onest them, thy fitting prize!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-96">
				<header>
					<p>96</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Thou dour disturber of man’s sprite and life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fount of backsliding and adultery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sagacious waster, and consummate thief</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of subjects, kingdoms, treasure, empery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They hail thee noble, and they hail thee chief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">though digne of all indignities thou be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they call thee Fame and Glory sovereign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>words, words, the heart of silly herd to gain!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-97">
				<header>
					<p>97</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘What new disaster dost thou here design?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What horror for our realm and race invent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What unheard dangers or what deaths condign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">veiled by some name that soundeth excellent?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What bribe of gorgeous reign, and golden mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose ready offer is so rarely meant?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Fame hast promised them? what pride of story?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What palms? what triumphs? what victorious glory?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-98">
				<header>
					<p>98</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘But oh! race ’gendered by his sin insane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom disobedience of the high command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">not only chasèd from the heav’enly reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and doomed to distant and exilèd land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but, eke, from other state too blest for men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Peace with Innocence fared hand in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that olden golden Age, his victims hurl’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>into an iron and an armèd world:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-99">
				<header>
					<p>99</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Since by this gustful Van’ity led astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lighter thou makest man’s light fantasy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since his brute fierceness and his lust of prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bear honoured names of Strength and Valiancy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since thou wilt price and prize, in wildest way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">despisal of man’s life, which aye should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>esteemed of mortals, nay, held doubly dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when He who gave it, gave it up with fear:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-100">
				<header>
					<p>100</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Neighbours thee not the hateful Ishmaelite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with whom abundant strife shalt ever hold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Follows he not th’ Arabian’s law unright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">an thou wouldst fight to fill of <strong>Christ</strong> the fold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A thousand cities, regions infinite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are they not his, an cov’etest earth and gold?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is he not strong in warfare, high in name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>if Honour be, not greed of gain, thine aim?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-101">
				<header>
					<p>101</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Dost leave the foeman breeding at thy gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who wendest foreign far-off fone to seek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereby this antique realm lies desolate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose strength, o’erstretchèd, waxeth ruinous weak?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Seekest thou dark and dubious chance of fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who hearest Fame with honey’d accents speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lauding thy lot, and hailing thee seignior</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Inde, Perse, Arab and Aethiopia-shore?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-102">
				<header>
					<p>102</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Oh, curst the Mortal, who the first was found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">teaching the tree to wear the flowing sheet!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">worthy th’ eternal pains of the Profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if just that justest law I hold and greet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ne’er may man’s judgment lofty and renown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor genius rare, nor harp sonorous sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>requite such gift with mem’ory, honour, fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>perish thy glory, perish e’en thy name!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-103">
				<header>
					<p>103</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Iápetus’ daring Son from Heaven brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the fire he added human breast to bless;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fire, that inflamed to wars a world distraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with death and eke disgrace: (ah, sad distress!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How better far for us and ours hadst wrought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Prometheus! and with loss of life the less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>had thy famed Statue never felt the fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of great designs that ’gender great desire!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-104">
				<header>
					<p>104</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Ne’er had the Stripling, miserably brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’tempted his Sire’s high car, nor empty Air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the mighty Mason and his boy, who gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">names which the Sea-gulf and the River bear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No fierce emprize and fell, by land and wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">through fire, steel, water, wind, frost, heat, to fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherein the human race loves not to range.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sorrowful sort! condition strangest strange!’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
