<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Instigated by the Demon, the King of Mombasah aimeth at destroying the Navigators: He plotteth treason against them under the fiction of friendship: Venus appeareth to Jupiter, and intercedeth for the Portugueze: He promiseth her to favour them and prophetically relateth some feats which they shall perform in the East: Mercury discloseth himself to the Gama in a dream, and warneth him to shun the dangers of Mombasah: They weigh anchor and reach Melinde, whose King receiveth the Captain with favour and hospitality.</p>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Mombasah’s King untimely end hath laid (1⁠–⁠17)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For famous Gama by his fell deceit:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Descending seawards, Venus saves th’ Armade, (18⁠–⁠32)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>and fares on high her sovran Sire to greet, (33⁠–⁠43)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She learns our future lot by Jove’s good aid: (44⁠–⁠55)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>appeareth Mercury to Lusus’ fleet, (56⁠–⁠71)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It makes Melindé, where a potent Chief (72⁠–⁠End)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>within his harbour lendeth glad relief.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-2-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas now the period when the Planet bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose race distinguisheth the hours of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">did at his longed-for, tardy goal alight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">veiling from human eyne his heav’enly ray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and of his Ocean-home, deep hid from sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the God of Night-tide oped the portal-way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when the false crafty folk came flocking round</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the ships, whose anchors scarce had bit the ground.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Mid them a villain, who had undertane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the task of deadly damage, spake aloud:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“O val’orous Captain, who hast cut the reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Neptune, and his salty plain hast plow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the King who governeth this island, fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to greet thy coming, is so pleased and proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he wisheth nothing save to be thy host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to see thee, and supply what need ye most.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, as he burneth, with extreme desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so famed a pers’onage to behold and greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he prays suspicion may no fear inspire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but cross the bar-line, thou and all thy Fleet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, sith by voyage long men greatly tire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy gallant crew by travel-toil is beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he bids thee welcome to refit on land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as, cèrtes, Nature must such rest command.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And if thou wendest seeking merchandise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">got in the golden womb of the Levant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cinnamon, cloves, and biting spiceries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">health-dealing drug, or rare and excellent plant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or, if thou lust for sparkling stones of price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Ruby fine, the rigid Diamant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hence shall thou bear such full, abundant store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that e’en thy Fancy shall affect no more.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Unto the Herald straight our Chief replieth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">grateful acknowledging the Royal hest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and saith, that seeing Sol now seawards hieth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he may not enter as becomes a guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But, when returning light shall show where lieth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the way sans danger, with a fearless breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Royal orders he will list fulfil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a Lord so gracious hath claim higher still.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He questions further, an the land contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">christenèd Peoples, as the Pilot sware:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The cunning Herald who ne’er speaks in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">voucheth that Christian men dwell mostly there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus doth he banish from our Captain’s brain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the cautious fantasies of doubt and fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore the Gama straightways ’gan to place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faith in that faithless unbeliever-race.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, as condemnèd felons he had brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">convìct of mortal crime and shameful deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who might in sim’ilar cases danger-fraught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">be ventured where the common weal had need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a twain of wily, well-tried wits he sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bade them the Moorman’s craft and trick’eries heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>go spy the City’s power, and seek to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whether desirèd Christians there may be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fair gifts he gave them for the Royal hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to quit the goodly will the greeting show’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by him held sure and firm and clear and bland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereas ’twas cleanly of a cont’rary mode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now all the rout perfidious and nefand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">quitting the Squadron o’er the waters row’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gladsome, joyous gestures, all deceit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pair of shipmates on the shore they greet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when in presence of the King convey’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the gifts they gave, and message did present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far less they witness’d, as ’bout town they stray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">than what they wanted on their work intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the shrewd sagacious Moors pretences made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to veil from sight what they to see were sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for where reigns Malice there we ever find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the fear of Malice in a neighbour’s mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But He,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> for ever fair, for ever young</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in form and feature, born of mothers twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by wondrous birth-rite; and whose wilful tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">would work the Navigators’ ban and bane⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dwelt in a house the City-folk among,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of form and vestment human; who did feign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to be a Christian priest, and here had raisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a sumptuous altar where he prayed and praisèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There had he limnèd, figuring aright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Holy Ghost’s high heavenly portraiture;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hover’d a Dove, in snowy plume bedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er the sole Phoenix, Mary, Virgin pure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Saintly Company was shown to sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Dozen, in that sore discomfiture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as when, taught only by the Tongues that burnt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with lambent fire, man’s varied tongues they learnt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thither conducted either Comrade went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where hateful Bacchus stood in lies array’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and rose their spirits, while their knees were bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">before the God who sways the worlds He made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The perfumed incense by Panchaia sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fuming its richest scent, o’ th’ altar laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thyóne’s Son; and now they view, forsooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the god of Lies adore the God of Truth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here was receiv’ed, for kindly rest at night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with ev’ery mode of good and trusty greeting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the twain of Christians, who misween’d the rite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">th’ unholy show of holy counterfeiting.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But soon as Sol returning rained his light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on sombre Earth, and in one instant fleeting</span>
					<br/>
					<span>forth from the ruddy-dyed horizon came</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Spouse Tithonian with her front aflame:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Return the Moormen bearing from the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Royal licence, with the Christian pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that disembarkèd by our Chief’s command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for whom the King feign’ed honest friendship fair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Portingall, assured no plot was plan’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and seeing scanty fear of scathe or snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when Christian peoples in the place abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to stem the salty river straightway stood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Advisèd him the scouts dispatcht ashore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that holy clerk and altars met their sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and how receivèd them the friendly Moor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while Night’s cloud-shadowèd mantle cloaked the light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nay, that both Lord and Liege no feeling bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">save what in kindness took a dear delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for, certès, nothing told of doubt or fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where proofs of friendship showèd sure and clear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whereon the noble Gama hied to greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gladly the Moors that up the bulwarks plied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for lightly trusteth sprite without deceit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and gallant souls in goodly show confide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The crafty people on the Flagship meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mooring their light canoes along her side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Merrily trooped they all, because they wot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the wisht-for prizes have become their lot.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The cautious war-men gather on the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">arms and ’munitions; that whene’er th’ Armade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ride at her anchors near the riv’erine strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the work of boarding may be readier made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With deepest treachery the traitors plan’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for those of Lusus such an ambuscade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that reckless of the coming doom they pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the blood-debt dating from Mozámbic Bay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Weighed are the biting anchors, rising slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while ’customed capstan-songs and shouts resound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">only the foresails to the gale they throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as for the buoyèd bar the Ships are bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But Erycína fair, from ev’ry foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">aye glad to guard and guide her Race renown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>seen the black ambush big with deadly bane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>flies from the welkin shaft-swift to the Main.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She musters Nereus’ maidens fair and blonde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with all the meiny of the sea-blue race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Water-princes her commandment own’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for the salt Ocean was her natal place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, told the reason why she sought the lond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with her whole bevy forth she set apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to stay the Squadron ere it reach the bourne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whence ne’er a Traveller may to life return.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On, on they hurry, scatt’ring high the spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and lash with silvern trains the spumy White:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Doto’s soft bosom breasts the briny way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with hotter pressure than her wonted plight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Springs Nisé, while Neríne seeks the fray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">clearing the crystal wavelets nimble light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bending billows open wide a path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>fearing to rouse the hurrying Nereids’ wrath.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Borne on a Triton’s shoulders rides in state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with fiery gesture, Dionaea fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor feels the bearer that delicious weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">superb his cargo of such charms to bear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now draw they nearer where stiff winds dilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the bellicose Armada’s sailing gear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They part, and sudden with their troops surround</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the lighter vessels in the vayward bound.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Girt by her nymphs the Goddess lays her breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against the Flagship’s prow, and others close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the harbour-entrance; such their sudden gest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the breeze through bellied canvas vainly blows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With tender bosom to tough timber prest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she drives the sturdy ship that sternward goes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her circling Nereids raise and urge afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the threatened victim from the hostile bar.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>E’en as to nesty homes the prov’ident Ants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their heavy portion’d burdens haling slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">drill their small legions, hostile combatants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’gainst hostile Winter’s war of frost and snow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There are their travails given to their wants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there puny bodies mighty spirits show:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not otherwise the Nymphs from fatal end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>labour the Portughuezes to defend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their force prevails; astern the Flagship falleth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’spite all aboard her raising fearful shout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">boiling with rage the Crew each yardarm hauleth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to port and starboard putting helm about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Apoop the cunning Master vainly bawleth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeing that right toforn upon his route,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>uprears a sea-girt rock its awful head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and present shipwreck fills his soul with dread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But as loud call and clamour ’gan uprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from the rude sailor toiling hard and keen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Moors are frighted by th’ unusèd cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as though they sighted Battle’s horrid scene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">None know the reason of such hot surprise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">none know in sim’ilar press whereon to lean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they hold their treach’erous felon tricks are known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and present tortures must their crime atone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lo! with a panick fear themselves they flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the swift-sailing barklets which they brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These high uplifted on the billows hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those deep in water diving safety sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sudden from starboard and from port they sprung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by dread of visionary sights distraught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for all would rather tempt the cruel tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for none in mercies of their foes confide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of such a fashion in the sylvan Mere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Frogs, a brood of Lycian blood whilòme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when fall of coming foot perchance they hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while all incautious left their wat’ery home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wake marish-echoes hopping here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to ’scape the perils threat’ening death and doom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, all ensconcèd in the well-known deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nought but their small black heads ’bove water peep:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So fly the Moors; the Loadsman who alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Ships in deadly imm’inent risk had led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">deeming his hateful plans to all beknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">plunged in the bitter depths and swimming fled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But as her course had missed the steadfast stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where every hope of darling life were dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>eftsoons our Amm’irall doth her anchor throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, near her, furling sail, the rest come to.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Observant Gama, seen this sudden sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Moorish strangeness, and surprised to view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his Pilot flying with accusing flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">divines the plottings of that bestial crew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And when ne hindrance showèd, ne the might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of tides that onwards bore, or winds that blew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yet that his Flagship forged ahead no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Marvel hailing thus he ’gan implore:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh Chance, strange, passing strange, that gave no sign!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh wondrous Godsend shown so clear, so plain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh fellest treason baffled inopine!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh hostile Paynims, false, perfidious strain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who of such desp’erate devilish design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by mortal wisdom could escape the bane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unless there throned in Heav’en the Sovran Guard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to weak humanity strong aid award?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Right well hath provèd Providence on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the scanty safety by these Ports purvey’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Right well appearance showeth every eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how all our confidence hath been betray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But since Man’s wit and wisdom vainly try</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to sound these feints and foils so deeply laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Thou, Almighty Guard! to guard him deign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who sans Thine aid himself would guard in vain!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And if Thy holy ruth so condescend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to save this People peregrine and poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who on Thy grace and goodness sole depend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to force salvation from the false fell Moor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">vouchsafe, O Lord, our weary course shall end</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">at some fair Harbour, shelter’d and secure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>or show the distant shores we pine to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>since all this sailing is for serving Thee.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The piteous prayer smote the loving ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Dionaea fair; her heart was painèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she left her Nymphs, all bathed in yearning tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who by her sudden flight perplext remainèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now she had thrid the lum’inous planet-spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">now the third Heaven’s gateway she had gainèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on, onward still to the sixth sphere, the throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where high All-Father sits and reigns alone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, as her way affronting, forth she hied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her ev’ry gesture such a grace expirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Stars, Skies and Aether’s circumambient tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and all that saw her with love-fire were firèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Those eyne wherein Dan Cupid aye doth nide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such vital spirits in all life inspirèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the frigid Poles with torrid ardours burnèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and spheres of Arctic frost to flame were turnèd.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And with more love to move her Sovereign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sire, who aye lov’d her with a constant will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">herself she shows as to the Trojan swain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she showed of old on Ida’s bosky hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If her the Hunter who the form of man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lost, seeing Dian in the glassy rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>had seen, he ne’er had died by rav’ening hound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>erst slain by a sorer and a surer wound.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wander’d the crispy threads of wavy gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">adown a bosom shaming virgin snow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her milk-hued breasts with ev’ry movement roll’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Love lay sporting but did nowhere show:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Flames with far-flashing fire the Zone’s white fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith the Boy gar’d ev’ry heart to glow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while round those columns’ polisht curves were climbing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desires, like ivy parent-trunk entwining.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A filmy Cendal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> winds around her waist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which del’icate sense conceals by modest veiling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and yet not all conceal’d, nor all confest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the veil, red-blushing lilies oft revealing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With warmer fondness still to ’flame his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she woos his sight with secret charms assailing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now all Olympus shakes with jealous jars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>rage burneth Vulcan, Love inflameth Mars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The while her angel-semblance showeth blended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with smiles a sadness in the sweetest way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">like some fair Ladye by rude swain offended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">incautious rough while playing am’orous play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who laughs and laughing pouts with wrath pretended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">passing withouten pause from grave to gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thus she, the Goddess who no rival heedeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>softer than sad before her Father pleadeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Aye had I deemèd, mighty Father mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in whatsoe’er my loving breast preferrèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to find thee kind and affable and benign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en though of hostile heart the hate were stirrèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But as I see thine ire to me incline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ire undeserv’ed⁠—to thee I ne’er have errèd⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>let Bacchus triumph with his wicked will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while in his weal I sit and wail mine ill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This Folk, these Sons of me, for whom I pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the tear that trickleth bootless ’fore thy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose woe, since wish’d them well, I work the more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when my good wishes but thy wrath excite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For them I weep, for them thine aid implore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and thus, in fine, with adverse fate I fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, because my love ill-fortune bears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will to will them ill and weal be theirs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet thus to perish by that wild-beast race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for I have been”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> * * * Whereon, all lovely flows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the burning tear-drop beading down her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as pearled with rory dew fresh shines the Rose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Silent awhile, as though her plea for grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the portals of her teeth list not disclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>she had pursued; but ere a word she said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the potent Thund’erer further plaint forbade:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, moved to pity by such gentle powers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pow’ers made to move the heart of Tyger dure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with beaming smile, as when the sky that lowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">waxeth serene, and clears the lift obscure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he dries his Daughter’s welling tears, and showers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">warm kisses on her cheeks and neck snow-pure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in mode that had the place been lere and lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a pair of Cupids had Olympus known.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, face approaching to the face he prizèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereat the sobbing tears the faster flow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en as some yeanling by the nurse chastisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">weepeth caresst with louder feint of woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To soothe her troubled bosom he devisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the future fortunes of her sons to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unripping thus from Fate’s impregnate womb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He opes the mysteries of the things to come:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou fairest Daughter mine! throw far thy fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lest to thy Lusians happen harm indign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor deem my spirit holdeth aught so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as the sad waters of these sov’reign eyne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou shalt behold, my Daughter, hear me swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Greek and Roman dimm’d of all his shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by Gestes illustrious this thy Hero-race</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall dare and do in Eastern dwelling-place.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“If glib Ulysses e’er to flee was fated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a life-long slav’ery on Ogygia-shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and if Antenor’s fortune penetrated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Illyric bays, Timavus’ fount t’ explore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’en if thy pious Aeneas navigated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where seas round Scylla and Charybdis roar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thy nobler scions higher grade shall win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall add new worlds to worlds of older men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Valvartes and cities and the tow’ering wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">built by their valour, Daughter, thou shalt see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Shalt see the Turk, deem’ed bravest brave of all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from their dread prowess forcèd aye to flee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Shalt see of Inde the free-born monarchs fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and own their mightier King’s supremacy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when, in fine, they wield the full command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall dawn a Higher Law<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> for every land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Him shalt thou see, who now in hurrièd flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fares distant Indus through such fears to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">make vasty Neptune tremble with affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and crisp his wavy waste sans breath of wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh Chance ne’er seen! Oh wonder-teeming Sight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this Quake of Water with plat calm combin’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh valiant race, with loftiest thought inbred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whom Earth’s four El’ements must regard with dread!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This Land, that water hath to them denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shalt see affording surest Hythe, where spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by their long voyaging, shall rest and ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Argosies bound from utmost Occident.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In fine, this seaboard all, that futile tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">death-snare to weave, shall pay obedient</span>
					<br/>
					<span>toll, tithe, and tribute, knowing vain it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to beard the Lusian Lyon in his lair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Shalt see King Erythras’ far-famèd Main</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">permute his nat’ural red to Fear’s pale dye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">eke shalt thou see the haughty Hormuz-reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">twice taken, prostrate in their presence lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There shalt thou see the furious Moorman slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pierced by his own deflected archery;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>till all ken clearly who thy Sons oppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by their own deed become their deadliest foes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Shalt see of Diu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> th’ inexpugnable wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">two sieges braving, while thy sons defend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there shall their val’orous worth be shown to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with feats of arms that every feat transcend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Envy shalt see in Mars majestical</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Lusian fierceness none shall dare offend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shall they sight the Moor with voice supreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span>before high Heaven false Mahound blaspheme.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou shalt see Góa from the Muslim tane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and in near future raised to queenly place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ladye of Orient land sublimely vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of triumphs wrested by thy conqu’ering Race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There, with superb, high, haughtiest disdain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Gentoo louting low to idols base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they bit and bridle, mastering every land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that ’gainst thy Lusians raiseth head or hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou shalt behold the Fortalice hold out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Cananor with scanty garnison:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Calecut thou shalt see endure sad rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that erst so populous and puissant town;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shalt in Cochin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> see one approv’d so stout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who such an arr’ogance of the sword hath shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no harp of mortal sang a similar story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>digne of e’erlasting name, eternal glory.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ne’er with such Mars-taught art and furious flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was Leucas seen in civil wars to glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when to his Actium-fight Augustus came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and laid th’ injurious Roman captain low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom, deft Aurora’s reign and race to tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far-famèd Nyle and Bactrus’ Scythic foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>despoilèd, ’spite victorious spoils and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that fair Egyptian not so chaste as fair;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“As thou shalt see when Ocean boileth o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with fires enkindled by thy Lusians’ bate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who captive make the Idol-man and Moor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and triumph high o’er many a subject state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till, won rich Aurea-Chersonésus’-shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far as far China they shall navigate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and each remotest isle of Orient tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and every Ocean in their rule shall bide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Tis thus, O Daughter mine! thy children’s lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">higher than human vigour to display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nowhere shall Brav’ery burn and blaze so hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from Ganges’ bank to Gaditanian bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor from the Boreal billows to the gut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where first an injured Lusian brake the way;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>e’en though their progress o’er the world t’ oppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Dead of Ages from their tombs arose.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This said, he sendeth Maia’s son divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to visit lowly earth, and there to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">some harbour’s peaceful shelter, with design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that all the Fleet shall ride sans risk of wreck:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, lest in false Mombasah-land indign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">more of delay the valiant Captain make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’tis Jove’s command that be in vision shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a restful region free from restless fone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now th’ airy space the Cyllenéan span’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">descending earth with feath’ery feet to tread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his hand was armèd with the fatal Wand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which sheds on weary eyne sweet drowsihed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith he called the sad-eyed shadowy band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from Hades, and obedient breezes sped:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wingèd basnet on his head he bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thus he sought the Melindanian shore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fame is his mate who mote aloud proclaim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Lusitanian’s weight and rarest worth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for mortal breast is won by noble name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that makes the bearer loved of all on earth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus winning stranger-hearts the Herald came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and to the mighty bruit gave timely birth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon Desire Melindé burns to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what mode of men the val’orous People be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thence to Mombasah takes the God his course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where the strange vessels rode in fear afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to bid the seamen leave, while none the worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those lands suspected and that treacherous bar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For scant availeth human fraud or force</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against Infernals waging treach’erous war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scant ’vaileth heart and art and judgment staid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when human wisdom lacketh heavenly aid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Already Night had past her middle way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and all the starry host with th’ alien light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rained on the breadth of Earth their radiance gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and now was Sleep tired man’s supreme delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Th’ illustrious Captain weary, wayworn, lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with careful watching through the cares of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a short repose for anxious eyne he snatchèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The men on duty at their quarters watchèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When in a vision Maia’s son was seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and heard to say: “Fly, Lusitanian! fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that wicked Monarch’s snares, that only mean</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to draw you forwards where ye surely die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fly, for breathes fair the breeze and smiles serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Aether, while stormless sleep the seas and sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in other part another King more benign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sure shelter offereth unto thee and thine!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here nought thou findest but the barb’rous rite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the guest-rite dear to cruel Diomed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ill-host that made each miserable wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the wonted forage of his stabled steed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Those altars which Busiris, infame sprite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">taught with the stranger’s wailing life to bleed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>here certès wait thee an thou longer dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fly, then, this folk perfidious, fierce, and fell!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Steer straight, along this outstretch’d sea-board run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">another land more leal shalt thou find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there near the Belt where th’ ever-blazing sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to Day and Night hath equal space assign’d:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There to thy Squadron honour gladly done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a King, with many a friendly service kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the surest shelter shall for thee provide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and for your India skilful trusty guide.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Mercury thus; and rousèd from his dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Captain rising in a stark dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while pierced the palpable Obscure bright streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of sudden light and splendid holy ray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, seen forthwith that him it best beseems</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in land so vile to make the shortest stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he bade his Master, urged by spirit new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to spread the canvas in what breeze there blew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Hoist sail!” he said, “hoist high in lib’ral air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for God commands, and Heav’n affects its friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from yon clear seats was sent a messengèr</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">only to speed our steps and shape our ends.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Meanwhile the sailors to set sail prepare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all work and either watch its anchor tends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the weighty irons with willing shouts are weighèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and sin’ewy strength, the seaman’s pride, displayèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now at what time their anchors high uprose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lurking in Night’s murk shadow rose the Moor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">stealthy to cut the cables of his foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that all might perish on the rocky shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But watched with lynx-like glances, clear and close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Portingalls prepared for ev’ry stowre:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Finding his victims wakeful th’ enemy fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by wings of terror, not by paddle, sped.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now the narrow sharp-cut Prores renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">cleaving the humid argent plain, their road;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">blandly the north and eastern Trade-wind blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with gentle movement, as in joyous mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Past perils in their talk review’d the Crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for with a fond delay Thought loves to brood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on dang’rous chances, when to death-in-life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life comes so near she scarcely ’scapes the strife.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One circle ended Phoebus all aglow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and on a second entered, when appearèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the far offing, sailing sure and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">two hulls by gently-breathing Zephyrs steerèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, as they must be manned by Moorish foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Squadron veering soon her prizes nearèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This one that fearèd fearful ills to brave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ran straight ashore her crew thereon to save.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No sim’lar cunning from such chances led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her consort, captive of the Lusian hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which, ne by rig’rous Mavors’ rage had bled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor felt what furies Vulcan doth command.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But weakly, master’d by a craven dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the feeble forces which the barquelet man’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>resistance offer’d none; which haply shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from such resisting greater ills had known.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And as the Gama felt him much incline’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to seek a Guide for India-land long sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he thought a Helmsman ’mid the Moors to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet naught to him succeeded as he thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">none mote give tidings of the lay of Inde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">under what tract of heav’n it might be brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all declare a harbour lies hard by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melinde, ready Pilots to supply.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her King’s benevolence the Moormen praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">conditions lib’ral, breast no guile that knew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">magnificent, grandiose and gentle ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with parts that won respect and honour true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">All this to heart for fact our Captain lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since to his vision came such view to shew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the dream-sent Cyllenéan; thus he sped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whither the vision and the Moorman led.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas the glad season when the God of Day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">into Europa’s rav’isher ’gan return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when warmèd either point his genial ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Flora scatter’d Amalthéa’s horn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The hasty Sun, that girds the heavenly way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">brought round the mem’ry of that blessèd morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when He, who ruleth all by Will Divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>upon Creation stampt His seal and sign:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At such a time the Squadron neared the part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where first Melindé’s goodly shore was seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in awnings drest and prankt with gallant art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to show that none the Holy Day misween:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Flutter the flags, the streaming Estandart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gleams from afar with gorgeous purple sheen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>tom-toms and timbrels mingle martial jar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus past they forwards with the pomp of war.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Men crowd and jostle on Melindé’s strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hasting to sight the stranger’s glad Armade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a folk more truthful far, humane, and bland</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">than any met on shores their course had made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now rides the Lusian Fleet anent the land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her pond’rous anchors now the depths invade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forthwith a captured Moor they send to greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the King and mani’fest whence had come the Fleet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The King who well that noble lineage knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which to the Portingalls such worth imparts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">prizeth their harb’ring at his Hythe, as due</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the praise to Braves so prompt in martial arts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, with the spirit ever pure and true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that ’nobleth gen’rous souls and gallant hearts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he prays by proxy all forthwith may deign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to land and use, as best they choose, his reign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Frank offers these, and made in Honour bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">simple the words, undoubted, unprepar’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith the Monarch greets each noble Knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who o’er such seas and lands so far hath fared.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And eke he sendeth muttons fleecy white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with many a cramm’d domesticate poulard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and tropick fruitage which the markets fill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet his good gifts are giv’n with better will.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A glad and eager ear our Captain lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to him who spake his Sovran’s speech benign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">straightway of royal gifts return he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">stow’d in his Squadron for such fair design:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Purple Escarlat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> cloth of crimson tint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the branchy Coral, highly prized and fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which in deep Water soft and tender grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in Air doth harden to a precious stone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Eke sends he one well known for courtly wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who with the King may pact of peace conclude;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and prayeth pardon that he could not quit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his ships at once, and leave the Fleet aflood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His trusty Truchman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> on the land alit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, as before the Monarch’s face he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>spake thus in style which only Pallas taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when praise and prayer firm persuasion wrought:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“O King sublime! to whom Olympus pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of His high justice gave the gift and boon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to curb and conquer peoples dour and dure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to win their love, nor less their fear to own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as safe asylum, haven most secure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to ev’ry Oriental nation known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thee have we come to seek, in thee to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the surest med’icine of the Wanderer’s mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“No Pyrates we, who fare on ports to prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and purse-proud cities that in war be weak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thieves, who with fire and steel the peoples slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their robber-greed on neighbour-goods to wreak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From haughty Europe to the realms of Day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we sail, and Earth’s remotest verge we seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Inde, the great, the rich, for thus ordaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the mighty Monarch who our country reigneth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“What brood so harsh as this was ever bred?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what barb’arous custom and what usage ban’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that can not only men from ports forbid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but grudge the shelter of their desert sand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What of ill Will hold they our hearts have hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that of a folk so few in fear they stand?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That traps for us they spread and ready snares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and work their worst whereby we die unwares?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But Thou, wherein full surely we confide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to find, O King benign! an honest man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and hope such certain aid to see supplied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as gave Alcino’us the lost Ithacan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to this thy Haven sure we stem the tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the Divine Interpreter in van:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as He sendeth us to thee ’tis clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thy heart must e’en be rare, humane, sincere.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And deem not thou, O King! that dreads to land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our famous Captain thee to serve and see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for aught he sees of base or underhand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or aught suspects of false and feign’ed in thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But know he acteth by the high command⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a law of all obeyed implicitly⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his King’s own hest, forbidding him t’explore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and from his Squadron land at port or shore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, since of subjects King may thus require,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for of the Head should members heed the sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou, kingly officed, never shalt desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the liege his lord’s command to disobey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but the high ben’efits, and those gifts still higher</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by thee bestow’d, he prom’iseth to repay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with all that done by him or his can be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>long as the rolling rivers seek the Sea.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus he; when all conjoint their voices raisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while each to each his separate thoughts convey’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the high stomach of the Race amazèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who through such seas and skies their way had made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Th’ illustrious King for loyalty bepraisèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Portingalls, the while his spirit weigh’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>how high his value, strong his orders are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose Royal word is heard in land so far.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, with a smiling mien and pleasèd face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he hailed the Herald, proff’ering high esteem:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“All black suspicions from your bosoms chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor let your souls with frigid terror teem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such be your gallant worth, your works of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the World your deeds shall aye most glorious deem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and whoso holdeth right to do you wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ne truth ne noble thoughts to him belong.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“That all you warmen may not instant land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">observing ’customèd pre-eminence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">though sorely grievèd by your King’s command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet much we prize so much obedience:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet, as your orders our desire withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor we consent to see such excellence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of heart, such loyalty of soul, belied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that our good wishes sole be gratified.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-88">
				<header>
					<p>88</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But, as to-morrow’s Sun on earth shall shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all our Flotilla shall make holiday;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to seek your sturdy Fleet is our design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we have so longed to see full many a day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And if your sea-tost vessels bear the sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of angry tempests, and their tedious way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>here they shall find in friendly form and guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pilots, munitions, vittaile and supplies.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-89">
				<header>
					<p>89</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He spake; and ’neath the sea-rim sank to rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Latona’s son, when home the Herald hied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the fair message to the Fleet addrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in a light canoe that fast outran the tide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now joy and gladness fillèd ev’ery breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all had the perfect cure at length descried⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discov’ery of the Land, long wisht-for sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thus they festival’d with glee the night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-90">
				<header>
					<p>90</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aboard is foyson of those artful rays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose splendours mock the trem’ulous hairy star:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now every bombardier his boast displays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till Ocean’s thunder answers earth and air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Cyclops’ art is shown in various ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in fire-stuffed shells, and burning bombs of war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others with voices which invade the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>make brazen notes from blaring trumps arise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-91">
				<header>
					<p>91</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Echoes a loud reply the ready shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with buzzing fireworks forming giddy gyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whirl burning wheels that far in Aether soar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sulphurous dust deep-hid explodes in fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Heav’en-high resounds the multitudinous roar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the soft blue waters don Flame’s red attire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor blazeth land the less: ’Tis thus friends greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their friends as foemen who in battle meet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-92">
				<header>
					<p>92</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Again the restless Spheres revolving sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to olden drudg’ry dooming man anew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Again did Memnon’s Mother radiance shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from the sluggard’s eyne soft sleep withdrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The latest shadows slowly melting fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on earthly flow’rets weeping frigid dew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when the Melindan King took boat that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>might view the Squad that swam the Blackmoor sea.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-93">
				<header>
					<p>93</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Boiling about him, swarming round the Bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dense crowds glad gather’d and enjoy’d the sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Caftans of finest purple glisten gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">glance splendid robes with silken tissue dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In lieu of warrior lance, and harsegaye<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and bow whose burnisht cusps mock Luna’s light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>aloft the revellers bear the palmy bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the fittest crown that decks the conqueror’s brow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-94">
				<header>
					<p>94</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A spacious stately barge, o’ercanopied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with dainty silks, of divers teinture stainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">beareth Melinde’s King, accompanied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by lords and captains of the land he reignèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rich clad he cometh with what pomp and pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his country customs and his taste ordainèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a precious Turbant winds around his head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of cotton wrought with gold and silken thread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-95">
				<header>
					<p>95</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Caftan of costly texture Damascene⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Tyrian colour honour’d there of eld;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Torque round his collar, shining golden sheen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose wealth of work its wealth of ore excel’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Glitters and gleams with radiance diamantine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dag-targe of costly price by girdle held:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show, in fine, upon his sandal-shoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>velvets with seed-pearl and gold-spangle strewn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-96">
				<header>
					<p>96</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With silken sunshade, high and round of guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fast to its handle bound, a gilded spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Minister the solar ray defies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lest hurt of baleful beam the high King bear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">High in the poop his strange glad music hies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of asp’erous noise, most horr’ible to the ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of archèd trumpets writhed in curious round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>roaring a rough, rude, unconcerted sound.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-97">
				<header>
					<p>97</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nor with less garnishment our Lusitanian</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">swift-sailing galleys from the Squadron bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to meet and greet the noble Melindanian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">begirt by goodly company galore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Gamma cometh dight in dress Hispanian;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but of French work the doublet was he wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Satin which Adrian Venice works and stains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>crimson, a colour which such prize obtains.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-98">
				<header>
					<p>98</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Buttons of gold his loopèd sleeves confine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where solar glancings dazzle gazing eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hosen of soldier fashion purfled shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with the rich metal Fortune oft denies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Points of the same the slashes deftly join,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gored in his doublet, with right del’icate ties:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold-hilted sword in mode of Italy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plume in his bonnet worn a little wry.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-99">
				<header>
					<p>99</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’ the suite and escort of the Captain show’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the dye murex⁠—Tyre’s surpassing tint⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the various shades that joy’d men’s eyne, and mode</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of dress devis’d with fashion different:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Such was th’ enamel, and as bright it glow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with cunning colours in quaint mixture blent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as though her rutilant bow had rear’d in air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Maid of Thaumas, fairest of the fair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-100">
				<header>
					<p>100</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sonorous trumpets manly breasts incite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gladding the heart with martial music gay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Churnèd the Moorish keels blue waters white</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and awnings sprent with dews of pearly spray:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The horrid-sounding bombards thunder fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while smoky hangings veil the splendid day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>roar the hot volleys hurtling sounds so loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>fain close with hands their ears the Moorish crowd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-101">
				<header>
					<p>101</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now the King our Captain’s galley sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who strainèd in his arms the welcome guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He with the courtesy which Reason taught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his host (who was of Royal rank) addrest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Noted th’ admiring Moor, with marvel fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his visitor’s ev’ery mode, and look, and gest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as one regarding with a huge esteem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Folk who so far in quest of India came.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-102">
				<header>
					<p>102</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And to him proffers in his phrase high-flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whatever goods his realm and haven boast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the while commanding him to hold his own</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what store might haply serve his turn the most:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Eke he assures him Fame had made well-known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Lusian name ere Lusians reached his coast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for long ’twas rumour’d that in realms afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>it had with peoples of his law waged war.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-103">
				<header>
					<p>103</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How Africk cont’inent’s farthest shores resound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he told him, with great deeds the warmen did;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose long campaigns the Conquerors had crown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lords of the lands where dwelt the Hesperid.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With long harangue he taught the crowd around</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the least deserts the Lusians meritèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and yet the most that Fame was fain to teach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when thus Da Gama to the King made speech:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-104">
				<header>
					<p>104</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“O thou! who sole hast seen with pit’iful eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">benignant King! our Lusitanian race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which in such mis’ery dire hath dared defy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fate, and the furies of mad seas to face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">may yon Divine eternity on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that ruleth man, revolving skyey space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>since gifts so goodly givest thou, I pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Heav’ens repay thee what we never may.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-105">
				<header>
					<p>105</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of all Apollo bronzèd hath thou sole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">peaceful didst greet us from th’ abysmal sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In thee from Aeolus’ winds that moan and howl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we find good, truthful, glad security.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Long as its Stars leads forth the vasty Pole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">long as the Sun shall light the days to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where’er I haply live, with fame and glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall live thy praises in my People’s story.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-106">
				<header>
					<p>106</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He spake, and straight the barges ’gin to row</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whither the Moorman would review the Fleet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">rounding the vessels, one by one, they go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that ev’ery not’able thing his glance may meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But Vulcan skywards voll’eying horr’ible lowe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with dire artill’ery hastes the guest to greet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while trumpets loud canorous accents blend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with shawms the Moorish hosts their answer send.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-107">
				<header>
					<p>107</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When due attention to the sights had lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the gen’erous Muslim, fill’ed with thrilling wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and hearing, eke, th’ unwonted instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that told its dreadful might in fiery thunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he bade the light Batèl wherein he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">at anchor quiet ride the Flagship under,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that with the doughty Gama he might hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>converse of matters erst by Rumour told.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-108">
				<header>
					<p>108</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Moor in varied di’alogue took delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and now he prayed the vis’itor would expound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">each war renowned and famous feat of fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fought with the races that adore Mahound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now of the peoples he would gain a sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that hold our ultimate Hispanian ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then of the nations who with us confine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>then of the mighty voyage o’er the brine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-109">
				<header>
					<p>109</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But first, O valiant Captain! first relate,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">quoth he, “with all the diligence thou can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what lands and climes compose your natal state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and where your home, recount with regular plan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor less your ancient lineage long and great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and how your Kingdom’s lofty rule began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with all your early deeds of derring-do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>e’en now, tho’ know’ng them not, their worth we know.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-110">
				<header>
					<p>110</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, prithee, further say how o’er the Main</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">long on this voyage through fierce seas you stray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeing the barb’arous ways of alien strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which our rude Africk-land to you display’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Begin! for now the team with golden rein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">draws near, and drags the new Sun’s car, inlaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with marquetry, from cold Aurora’s skies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleep wind and water, smooth the wavelet lies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-111">
				<header>
					<p>111</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And as th’ Occasion such a fitness showeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so is our wish your wondrous tale to hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who dwells among us but by rumour knoweth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Lusitanian’s labour singular?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Deem not so far from us removèd gloweth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">resplendent Sol, that need thy judgment fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to find Melinde nurse so rude a breed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which can ne prize ne praise a noble deed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-112">
				<header>
					<p>112</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Vainly the haughty olden Giants vied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by war to win Olympus clear and pure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pirith and Theseus mad with ign’orance tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Pluto’s realm to burst the dread Obscure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If in the world such works hath workèd pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">not less ’tis labour excellent and dure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bold as it was to brave both Heav’en and Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for man o’er raging Nereus to prevail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-113">
				<header>
					<p>113</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With fire consumèd Dian’s sacred fane⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that master-piece of subtle Ctesiphon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Heróstratus, who by such deed would gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of world-wide Fame the high immortal boon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If greed of foolish praise and glory vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to actions so perverse may urge men on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>more reason ’tis to crown with endless fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeds that deserve, like Gods, a deathless name.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
