<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Vasco da Gama pursueth the recital of his voyage, and describeth to the King of Melinde his departure from Lisbon; the divers lands whereat they touched, and the peoples whom they saw as far as the Cape of Good Hope: The chance of Fernam Velloso: The tale of the giant Adamastor: Continuation of the voyage to Melinde, where the discourse endeth; peace and true friendship being established between the Gama and that King.</p>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>The famèd Gama tells the forceful King (1⁠–⁠30)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His long-drawn voyage, and uncertain road;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What couthless nations in hot Africk spring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, eke, Fernam Velloso’s hardihood: (31⁠–⁠36)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How Adamastor, Giant menacing (37⁠–⁠60)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They saw, who claimed to be of Terra’s brood;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And other things that happened till was found (61⁠–⁠end)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haven of rest, with comfort safe and sound.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-5-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Such words that agèd Sire of honoured mien</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">still was exclaiming, as we spread the wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to catch the sea-breath gentle and serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and from the well-known Port went sorrowing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">After the manner of far-faring men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when loosed the sail we garred the welkin ring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>crying ‘Boon Voyage!’ whereupon the breeze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>made every trunk glide off with ’customed ease.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Twas in the season when th’ Eternal Light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">entered the Beast that workt Nemaea’s woe;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and rolled our Earth, consumed by Time’s long flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in her sixth epoch, feeble, cold and slow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now, in the wonted way, had met her sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the suns that fourteen hundred courses show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with seven and ninety more, wherein she ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as o’er the seas th’ Armada’s course began.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Slow, ever slower, banisht from our eyne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">vanisht our native hills astern remaining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Remained dear Tagus, and the breezy line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Cintran peaks, long, long, our gaze detaining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Remainèd eke in that dear country mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our hearts with pangs of mem’ory ever paining:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, when all veilèd sank in darkling air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>naught but the welkin and the wave was there.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus fared we opening those wastes of tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no generation openèd before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sighting new islands and new airs we hied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which gen’erous Henry had the heart t’ explore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Past Mauritanian hills and homes we plied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the realm Antaeus ruled in times of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>leaving to larboard; on our dexter hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lay nothing surer than suspected land.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Hard by the great Madeiran Isle we past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose wealth of woodland won her chryssome name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where first our people did their fortunes cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for name more famous than for classick fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But not the least, although ’twas found the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the smiles of Venus shall this Island claim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, an ’twere hers, scant cause it had to fear a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cnidos or Cyprus, Paphos or Cythéra.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“We left Massylia’s seaboard, sterile waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Azenéguan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a> herds their cattle feed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a folk that never soft sweet waters taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor doth the meadow-math suffice their need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a land no luscious fruit’ery ever graced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where birds spoil iron in their maws of greed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a soil where nought save horrid Want abounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>parting the Berber’s from the Blackmoor’s grounds.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“We past the limit where, his southing done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sol guides his chariot t’oward his northern goal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where lie the Races whence Clyméné’s son</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the clear bright colour of the daylight stole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here laving strangest peoples loves to run</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">black Sanagá in tropick summer cool;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where th’ Arsenarium Cape its name hath lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yclept Cape Verd by us that keep the coast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now past Canaria’s archipelago⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Fortunate Isles’ of olden mariners these⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the waves that play around the Maids we plow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of agèd Hesper, hight Hesperides:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lands ever new, whose wonders greater grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon the sight, uprose our eyne to please:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with a prosp’rous wind we took the port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to take provision of the wonted sort.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now at his Island was the harbour tane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that warrior Sanct ‘Iago’s name did take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Saint who often holp the sons of Spain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">brave slaught’ering of the Moorish man to make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hence while a favouring Boreas fanned the Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">once more we sped to cut the vasty lake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of briny Ocean, while beneath the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>settled the shore that sweet refreshment gave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Compast our courses thence the greater part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Africk, eastward left her continent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The province Joloff which, disposed athwart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">departs in tribes the Negro ’habitant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mighty Mandinga-land by whose good art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the rich and lucid ore for us is sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which curvèd Gámbia’s wealth of waters drinketh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ere in Atlantis’ breadth his current sinketh:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“We past the Dorcades,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a> those isles assign’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the Weird Sisters erst the home to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who born of several vision reft and blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">made single eye-ball serve for all the three:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou, only thou, whose crispy locks entwin’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">frore Neptune fired’st in his realm, the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>than ev’ery foulest monster fouler still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the burning sand with viper-brood didst fill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<br/>
					<span>“In fine with pointed Prow t’oward Austral shore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">across the vastest Guinea Gulf we stray’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">leaving the rugged Range where Lyons roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Cape of Palmas called from palmy shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Rio Grande,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a> where the thund’erous Bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">roars on our noted coasts, we left and made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that goodly Island named from him who tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to thrust his finger in the God-man’s side.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There the broad shores of Congo kingdom show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whilom by us convert to faith of <strong>Christ</strong>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where long Zaïré’s deep clear waters flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">River by men of old unseen, unwist:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And now in fine the wide-spread seas I plow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">far from Callisto’s well-known Pole, and list</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to pass the torrid heats beneath the Line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which doth the centre of our Sphere define.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And now our vision had afront descried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there in the new half-heav’en a meteor new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">unseen by other men, who or denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or held it doubtful, an ’twere false or true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We saw the Firm’ament’s darker, duller side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">aye scant of stellar light where stars be few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and the fixt Pole where man may not agree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>if other land begin, or end the sea.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus passing forward we the regions gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where twice Apollo’s yearly passage lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">twin winters making, and of summers twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while he from Pole to Pole alternate flies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Through calms and storms, caprices of the Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of angry Aeolus sea-sent tyrannies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>we saw the Bears, despite of Juno, lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their tardy bodies in the boreal wave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To tell the many dangers of the deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sea-changes landsman never apprehendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sudden Tornados, storms the seas that sweep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Levens, whose fire the depths of air accendeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">black nights when Heav’en in rain-flood seems to weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Thunders bellowing till the welkin rendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>were but lost labour, and would do me wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>e’en were I dower’d with an iron tongue.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Portents I witness’d, which rude mariners</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by long experience wont their lore to try,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">vouch for veracious, while each one avers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">things must be truthful when they meet his eye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These the sound judgment of the Sage prefers;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or taught by Science or pure Wits to ’spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the hidden secrets which in Nature brood⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to judge misfacts, or facts mis-understood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I saw, and clearly saw, the living Light,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which sailor-people hold their Patron-saint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in times of trouble and the winds’ rude fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and sable orcan when man’s heart is faint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor less to one and all ’twas exquisite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">marvel, surpassing power of wonderment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to see the sea-based clouds, with bulky shaft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>upheaving Ocean’s depth with sucking draught.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Certès I saw it (nor can I presume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my sight deceivèd me) as high it grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">an airy vapourlet, a subtle fume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which, caught by windy currents, whirling flew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thence tow’ering tall to circumpolar gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Tube appeared so thin, so faint of hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that man’s unaidèd sight could hardly see it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet of some cloudy substance seemed to be it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Little by little growing high in air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with bigger girth than biggest mast it loomèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">here slim its middle, broad its bosom, where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">great gulps of water were in floods enwombèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The wave of ev’ery Wave it seemed to share;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while gathered vapours o’er its summit gloomèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>increasing ever more, and overchargèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as the huge water-load its bulk enlargèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“E’en as a ruddy Leech sometimes is seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fixt on the lips of beeve (that careless stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to drink on frigid fountain’s hem of green),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">slaking her fire of thirst with alien blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sucking, she rounds her form with hunger lean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and swills and swells till full of gory food:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the grand column greater volume gaineth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>itself, and heavier weight of cloud sustaineth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But, when ’twas wholly filled, and fully fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">withdrawn the footing planted on the Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">athwart the welkin pouring floods it fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with water bathing ’jacent watery plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and all the waves it suckt in waves it shed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein no salty savour mote remain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let our Sages deft in Script expose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what mighty secrets these which Nature shows.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Had the Philosophers, who fared of eld</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so far the Wonders of the World to find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Miracles which I beheld, beheld;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the canvas spreading to such divers wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what many weighty volumes had they fill’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what pow’er to Stars and Signs had they assign’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what growth to knowledge! what rare qualities!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and all the purest Truth that scorneth lies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Five times the Planet, which maintains her place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the first sky, her swifter course had made,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">now showing half and then her full of face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while over Ocean our Armada sped:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When poised on topmost yard, in giddy space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Land!’ shouts a lynx-eyed sailor, ‘land ahead!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurry the crews on deck in huge delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and over Orient sky-rim strain their sight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In misty manner ’gan their shapes to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the highland-range attracting all our eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the pond’erous anchors stood we prompt to throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and furl the canvas which now useless lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And that with surer knowledge mote we know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the parts so distant which before us rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with Astrolábos, novel instrument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which safe and subtle judgment did invent:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“We landed, lost no time, on long and wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a> and the seamen scattered ’bout the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to see what curious things be there descried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where none descried or ever trod before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But with my Pilots I retired aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on farther sands, our landfall to explore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and lief the solar altitude would span,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and map the painted world in chart and plan.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here had our wand’ering course outrun, we found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Semi-capran Fish the final goal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">standing atween him and the gelid round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Earth’s austral portion, the more secret Pole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sudden I see my crew a man surround,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">complexion’d sooty as the charrèd coal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>tane as he hied him far from home to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>combs of rich honey from the hilly brake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He comes with troubled gest and gait, as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he ne’er had found him in such fell extreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor he our speech, nor we his jargon know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a salvage worse than brutal Polypheme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Of the fine fleecy store to him I show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Colchos-treasure, gentle ore supreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the virgin silver, spices rich and rare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yet seemed the Sylvan nought for these to care.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then bade I baser things be brought to his view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bunches of glassy beads transparent bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of little tinkling falcon-bells a few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a cap of cramoisie that glads the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By signs and signals then I saw and knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in such cheap trash he takes a child’s delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I bid them loose him with his treasures all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when off he hurries for the nearest kraal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“His friends and neighbours on the following day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all mother-nude, with night-entinctur’d skin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">adown their asp’erous hillocks fand their way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">làrgesse and gifts their mate had won, to win:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In crowds they gather’d and so tame were they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the show of softness bred much daring in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fernam Velloso’s brain to see the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thread the bushes with the barbarous band.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now doth Velloso on his arm rely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, being arr’ogant, weens to wend secure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but when already overtime goes by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein no sign of good I can procure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">standing with face upturned in hope to ’spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the bold Adv’enturer, lo! adown the dure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hillocks appears he, making for the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with more of hurry than he showed before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Coelho’s galley lightly rowed for land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to take him off, but ere the shore she made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a burly Blackmoor cast a bully hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on him, for fear their prisoner evade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Others and others coming, soon the band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">grappleth Velloso, who finds none to aid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I haste, our gallant oarsmen strenuous working,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when shows a Negro flock<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a> in ambush lurking.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now from the clashing cloud a rattling rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of shafts and stones began on us to pour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor did they hurtle through the lift in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for thence my leg this hurt of arrow bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But we, like men with causes to complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">send such thick-woven answer strong and sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that from their exploit gainèd some, perhaps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a blush of honours crimson as their caps.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, saved Velloso from such imm’inent fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fast to the Squadron both the boats retirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seeing the rude intent and ugly hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of brutes by bestial rage and malice firèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from whom no better tidings could we ’wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">anent that India-land, the dear-desirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>save it lay far, far, far, the fellows said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more the canvas to the breeze I spread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then to Velloso quoth a mate in jest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(while all with meaning smile the jibe attend),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Holá, Velloso! sure that hilly crest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is hard to climb as easy to descend.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Yea, true!’ the daring volunteer confest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘but when so many curs afar I ken’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>packing, I hurried, for I ’gan to doubt me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ill-luck might catch you were ye there without me.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He then recounted how, when duly made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that wooded Mount, the blacks of whom I speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his further travel o’er the land forbade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">threat’ening unless he turn death-wrong to wreak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then, straight returning, ambuscade they laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that we when landing a lost mate to seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>might straight be banisht to the Reign obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that at more leisure they the loot secure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But now five other suns had come and gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since from our landfall went we forth to plow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">seas to the seaman still unseen, unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while from astern the breezes favouring blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when, as a night closed in, all careless strown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Crew kept watch upon the cutting Prow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>deep’ening the welkin’s darkling hues, a cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sails high o’erhead, and seems the sky to shroud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“It came so chargèd with such tem’erous stride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in every falt’ering heart blank fear it bred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Roars from afar and raves the sombre tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as though vain thunder’ing on some rocky head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Almighty Pow’r, o’er worlds sublime!’ I cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘what threat from Heaven, or what secret dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall now this climate and this sea deform,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what greater horror than the natural storm?’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“These words I ended not, when saw we rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Shape in air, enormous, sore the view o’it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Form disformèd of a giant size;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">frownèd its face; the long beard squalid grew o’it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">its mien dire menacing; its cavern’d eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">glared ghastly ’mid the mouldy muddy hue o’it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>stainèd a clayey load its crispy hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and coal-black lips its yellow tusks lay bare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“So vast its eerie members, well I can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">assure thee, all the double deemed to sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Rhodes’ Colossus, whose inord’inate span</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">one of the world’s Seven Wonders once was hight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But when its gross and horrent tones began</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to sound as surged from Ocean’s deepest night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ah! crept the flesh, and stood the hair of me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and all, that gruesome Thing to hear and see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘O rasher, bolder Race:’⁠—’twas thus it spoke⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘than all whose daring deeds have tempted Fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou, whom no labours tame nor war’s fell stroke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor rest wilt grant on human toils to ’wait:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Since these forbidden bounds by thee are broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who durst my Virgin Seas to violate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which long I guardèd, where I ne’er allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>plowing to foreign or to native prow:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Since the dark secrets com’st thou here to ’spy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Nature and her humid element,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which from Man’s highest lore deep hidden lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on noble or immortal mission sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from me the Terrors which ye dare defy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hear now, the sequence of thy rash intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>o’er ev’ery largest Sea, o’er ev’ery Land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which still thy cruel conquest shall command.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘This know, what ships shall sail my waters o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and brave, as brav’est thou me, to work my worst;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to them assurèd foe shall prove my shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where blow the storm-winds, and the tempests burst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hear! the first Squadron<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a> that shall dare explore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and through my restless waves shall cleave the first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>such improvisèd chastisement shall see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>more than all dangers shall the damage be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘An Hope deceive not, here I hope to deal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">consummate vengeance on th’ Explorer’s head;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor he the latest shall my fury feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by pertinacious confidence ybred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nay, ye shall ev’ery year see many a keel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(if me my judgment here hath not misled)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>such wrecks endure, shall see such fate befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that Death shall seem the lightest ill of all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘And to the first illustrious Leader<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a> whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fame’s favour raiseth till he touch the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I will give novel and eternal tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the dark sentence of a God all-wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here of hard Turkish fleet that dree’d his doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he shall depose the prideful prosp’erous prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>here shall at length my wrath and wrack surpass a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quíloa in ruins and a rent Mombasah.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Shall come Another, eke of honour’d fame,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Knight of loving heart and liberal hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and he shall bring his dainty darling Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Love’s choicest treasure bound by Hymen’s band:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ah, sore the sorrow, dark the day when came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the pair to this my hard and hateful land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>condemn’d from cruel wreck their lives to save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and, suffer’ed toils untold, to find a grave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Shall see slow starving die their children dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sweet pledges bred of love, in fond love born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall see the Caffres, greedy race and fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">strip the fair Ladye of her raiment torn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Shall see those limbs, as crystal light and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by suns, and frosts, and winds, and weather worn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when cease to tread, o’er long drawn miles, the heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of sandy waste those delicatest feet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, more, shall see their eyne, whom Fate shall spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from ills so dreadful, from so dire a blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the two sad lovers left in mis’ery, where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">implac’able thorns and terrible thickets glow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There, when the stones wax soft at their despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shown by their ceaseless woe, sigh, groan, tear, throe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in a last strained embrace their souls exhale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from out the fairest, fondest, saddest jail.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The fearful Monster would more ills unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our doom disclosing, when aloud cried I:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Who art thou, whose immense stupendous mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pardie, is mighty miracle to mine eye?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His lips and dingy orbs he wreathed and roll’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and with a sudden frightful wailing cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in slow and bitter accents he replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as though the question probed and galled his pride:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘I am that hidden mighty Head of Land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Cape of Tempests fitly named by you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which Ptol’emy, Mela, Strabo never fand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor Pliny dreamt of, nor old Sages knew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here in South Ocean end I Africk strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where my unviewèd Point ye come to view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which to the far Antarctick Pole extendeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>such he your daring rashness dire offendeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Encelados, and Terra’s Titan brood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Aegaeon and the Centiman, the line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of me, who Adamástor hight, withstood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the hand that hurleth Vulcan’s bolt divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hill upon hill to pile was not my mood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to conquer Ocean-waves was my design;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I went to seek, as Captain of the Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the fleet of Neptune which I sought in vain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘For Peleus’ high-born spouse my burning love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lurèd me rashly to such rude emprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the belles of heaven ne’er my breast could move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mine Ocean-Empress filled my yearning eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">One day I saw her with the Nereids rove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all bare and beauteous, ’neath the summer skies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and in such manner she bewitcht my will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no other feeling can my bosom fill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘But as my Ladye’s grace I could not gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for being homely, huge of form and face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I sware by forceful rape my want t’ obtain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and so to Doris I disclosed my case:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In dread she told her child my loving pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when modest Thetis, with her merry grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>replied:⁠—‘What Nymph can boast, whate’er her charms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the strength to wrestle in a Giant’s arms?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Algates, that Ocean may once more be free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from this sad Warfare, I some mode will find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to gar mine honour with his suit agree;’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thus was the message to mine ear consign’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I, who no treach’erous snare in aught could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(for lovers’ blindness is exceeding blind)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>felt with a buoyant hope my bosom bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and hopes of passion by possession crown’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Love madden’d, moonstruck, now I fled the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and kindly Doris named the trysting-night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">at length my lovely love I saw appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my winsome Thetis, in her robeless white:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like one possest I hurried from afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">opeing mine arms to clasp the life and sprite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of this my body, and hot kisses rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>upon her cheeks, her locks, her glorious eyne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Ah! how it irks to tell my sad disgrace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thinking my lover in these arms to hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mine arms a rugged Mountain did embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yclad with bramble bush, a horrid wold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Before this rock, upstanding face to face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which for that Angel front I did enfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>no more was I a Man, no! lorn and lone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a rock, a stone, I stood before a stone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Oh Nymph! the loveliest born that bare the Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">alb’eit my presence ne’er by thee was sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how could my poor delusion cause thee pain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Why not be mountain, cloud, rock, vision, nought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Raging I wandered forth well-nigh insane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for yearning grief with foul dishonour fraught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to seek another world, where none could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>my trickling tears, and scoff at them and me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘Meanwhile my brethren, who the conquest lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">crusht in extremest conquer’d mis’ery pinèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom, for more surety, that vain-glorious host</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of upstart Gods ’neath various Mounts consignèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And, as Immortals scoff at mortal boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I, to my sorrows in no wise resignèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>felt Fate, mine awful foe, begin to shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a dreadful vengeance for my daring rape.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ‘My flesh slow hardens into solid earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to rocks and horrid crags enstone my bones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">these limbs thou seest and this mighty girth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">extend where desert Ocean raves and moans:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In fine, the giant-stature of my birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to this far Headland sprent with rocks and stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Gods debased; and doubling all my woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>round me white, winsome, watery Thetis flows.’</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus parlied he; and with appalling cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from out our sight the gruesome Monster died;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the black cloud melted, and arose on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sonorous thunders rollèd by the tide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To th’ Angel-choirs with hands upraisèd, I⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">invisible Controls so long our guide⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>prayed God in pity would those Ills withhold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by Adamástor for our Race foretold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now Pyroeis and Phlegon ’gan appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with th’ other pair that hale the radiant wain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when the tall heights of Table Mount we spere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which from the mighty Giant form hath tane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Standing along now easting shores we steer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and cleave the waters of the Lévant main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the coast-line hugging with a northing Prow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and sight a second landfall o’er the bow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The native owners of this other land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the burnisht livery of Aethiops wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet was their bearing more humane and bland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">than those who so mistreated us before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With dance and joyous feasts, a merry band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">approacht us tripping on the sandy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bringing their Women and fat herds that grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the pastures, gentle kine of high-bred race.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The bronzèd Women, scorcht by burning clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">astraddle rode the slow-paced gentle Steer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">beasts which their owners hold of beeves the prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">better than any of the herds they rear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pastoral canticles, or prose, or rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">concerted in their mother-tongue we hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and to the rustick reed sweet tunes they teach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as Tit’yrus chaunted ’neath his spreading beech.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“These, who seemed glad to see the guest abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">amid them, greeted us with friendly mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and many a fatted fowl and sheep supplied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their goods exchanging for the things deemed good:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But though my comrades tried, they vainly tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for not a word in fine was understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that of our search a signal might convey:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anchor I weighèd, and I sailed away.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now here in mighty gyre our flight had flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">round Blackmoor Africk shore; and now regainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Prores the torrid heat of Middle Zone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while Pole Antarctick far in rear remainèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">We left astern an Islet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a> first made known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the first Squadron whose long toils attainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Cape of Tempests; and, that Islet found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>ended her voyage at its bourne and bound.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thence drave we, cutting for a length of days⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where storms and sadd’ening calms alternate range⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">undreamèd Oceans and unpathèd ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our sole conductor Hope in toils so strange:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Long time we struggled with the sea’s wild maze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till, as its general Law is changeless Change,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>we met a current<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a> with such speed that sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>against the flow ’twas hard to forge ahead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of this prevailing flood the puissant force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which to the southward our Armada hove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such set opposèd to our northing course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the winds to waft us onwards vainly strove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till Notus fashed to find us fare the worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(it seems) in struggle with the drift that drove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>enforced his blasts, and with such choler blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>maugre the mighty current on we drew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Reducèd Sol that famed and sacred Day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein three Kings in Orient region crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a King came seeking who belittled lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a King in whom three Kings in One are bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That morn to other hythe we made our way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">finding the peoples that before we found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by a broad River, and we gave it name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from the high hol’iday when to port we came.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Sweet food we barter’d from their scanty store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sweet water from their stream; but natheless here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gained we no tidings of that Indian shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from men to us that almost dumblings were.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See now, O King! what distant regions o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Earth we wandered, peoples rude and fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor news nor signal had our labours earnèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of the fair East for which our spirits yearnèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Imagine, prithee, what a piteous state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">must have been ours when all save life was gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by hunger broken and the storm’s wild hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and curst by novel climes and seas unknown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our hearts despaired of Hope deferred so late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till dull Despair had marked us for her own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>toiling beneath those strange unnat’ural skies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>our northern nature’s fellest enemies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And now decayed and damaged waxt our food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sore damaging the wasted frame of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">without one comfort, sans one gleam of good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">not e’en Hope’s flatt’ering tale nor Fancy vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dost think that Sailor of the sturdiest mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or any Soldier save the Lusitan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>perchance, had loyalty so long preservèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>both for his King and for the Chief he servèd?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Dost think, the wretches had not mutinied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against the Head who with their mood had striven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">parforce becoming Pyrats, turned aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from duty, by despair, want, hunger driven?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In very sooth these men were sorely tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">since from their hearts ne moil ne toil hath driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Portingall-excellence, abounding still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in leal valour and obedient will.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Leaving in fine that Port of fair sweet flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, dight once more to cut the salty spray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">off from the coast-line for a spell we stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till deep blue water ’neath our kelsons lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for frigid Notus, in his fainty mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was fain to drive us leewards to the Bay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>made in that quarter by the crookèd shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whence rich Sofála sendeth golden ore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This Sea-bight passing far, the nimble helm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by men to saintly Nicholas assignèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where roaring Ocean raves on Terra’s realm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this and that vessel’s prore eftsoons inclinèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And now from hearts which hopes and fears o’erwhelm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hearts in such faith t’ a fragile plank resignèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as hope grew hopeless, esperance despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>good sudden tidings banisht cark and care.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And thus it happed, as near the shore we went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where beach and valley lay in clearest view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a stream whose course in ocean there was spent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">showèd of sails that came and went a few.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Good sooth, to greatest joyaunce all gave vent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when first we sighted mariners who knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>mariner-practice; for we here were bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to find some tidings which, indeed, we found.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“All Aethiopians are, yet ’twould appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they held communion with men better bred:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Some words of Arab parlance here we hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">imported sounds their mother-speech amid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A flimsy wrapper of tree-wool they wear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a-twisted tight about each kinky head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while other pieces dipt in azure tinct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>are round their middles and their shame precinct.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In Arab language, which they little know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but which Fernam Martins well comprehendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ships great as ours, they say, scud to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">piercing the waters with the beak that rendeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But there where Phoebus leaps in air, they go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whither the broad’ening coast to south extendeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>then from south sunwards;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a> and a Land is there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of folk like us and like the daylight fair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here was each bosom with rare gladness cheerèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the good people, and their news much more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">From all the signals in this stream appearèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Stream of Good Signals’ christened we the shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A marble column on this coast we rearèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whereof, to mark such spots, a few we bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>its name that lovely Angel-youth supplied<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>who did Thobias to Gabáël guide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Of shells and oysters, and the weedy load,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the noisome offspring of the Main profound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we cleansed our kelsons which the long sea-road</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">brought to careening cloggèd and immund:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our blameless Aethiops, who not far abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with pleasing jocund proffers flockt around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>supplying maintenance we mainly sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pure of all leasing, free from feigning thought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet from our esp’erance great, our hopes immense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bred by this seaboard, was not pure and true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the joy we joyed; nay, cruel recompense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">dealt us Rhamnúsia, sorrows strange and new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus smiling Heav’en mixt favours doth dispense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in such condition dark and dure man drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the breath of Life; and, while all Ills endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good changeth often, Good is never sure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And ’twas that sickness of a sore disgust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref-132" epub:type="noteref">132</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the worst I ever witness’d, came and stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the lives of many; and far alien dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">buried for aye their bones in saddest dole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who but eye-witness e’er my words could trust?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of such disform and dreadful manner swole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the mouth and gums, that grew proud flesh in foyson</span>
					<br/>
					<span>till gangrene seemèd all the blood to poyson:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Gangrene that carried foul and fulsome taint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">spreading infection through the neighb’ouring air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">No cunning Leach aboard our navy went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">much less a subtle Chirurgeon was there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but some whose knowledge of the craft was faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">strove as they could the poisoned part to pare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as though ’twere dead; and here they did aright;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all were Death’s victims who had caught the blight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“At last in tangled brake and unknown ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our true companions lost for aye, we leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who ’mid such weary ways, such dreary round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such dread adventures aidance ever gave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How easy for man’s bones a grave is found!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Earth’s any wrinkle, Ocean’s any wave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whereso the long home be, abroad, at home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for ev’ery Hero’s corse may lend a tomb.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“When from that Haven we resumed our way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while brighter hopes with darker hearts combine’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we opèd Ocean where the down coast lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">expecting surer signal e’er to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">At last we rode in rude Mozámbic Bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of whose vile leasing, and whose villain kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thou must have knowledge; and the foul deceit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherewith Mombásah would her guests defeat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Until safe anchored in thy harbour, rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with all the gracious guest-rites that bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">health on the living, on the dying life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">God in His pity pleased the way to show:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here rest, here sweet repose from grief, toil, strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">new Peace appeasing ev’ry want and woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>thou gavest us: Now, if hast heard me well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>told is the tale thou badest me to tell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Judge then, O King! an over Earth e’er went</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">men who would ’tempt such paths of risk and dread?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Dost deem Aeneas, or e’en eloquent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ulysses, fared so far this Earth to tread?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Did any dare to see the Sea’s extent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">howe’er the Muse their Gestes hath sung or said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as I by force of will and skill have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and still shall see; or e’en the eighth, I ween?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This, who so deeply drank of Fount Aonian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er whom contend in conquest peregrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rhodes, Ios, Smyrna, with the Colophonian</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Athens and Argos and the Salamine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And that, the lustre of the land Ausonian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose voice altis’onous and whose lyre divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his native Mincius hearing, sinks to sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while Tyber’s waves with pride and pleasure leap:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-88">
				<header>
					<p>88</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Sing, laud and write they both in wild extremes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of these their Demigods, and prowess vaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on fabled Magians, Circes, Polyphemes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Sirens lulling with the sleepy chaunt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Send them to plow with oar and sail the streams</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Cicons; on th’ oblivious lands descant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where slumb’erous Lotus-eaters dazed and died;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>e’en be their Pilot whelmed in Ocean-tide:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-89">
				<header>
					<p>89</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Storms let them loosen from the Bags of Wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">create Calypsos captivate by love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">make Harpies’ touch contam’inate all they find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and in sad Hades make their Heroes rove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">however much, o’er much, they have refine’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such fabled tales, which Poet’s fancy prove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the simple naked truth my story telleth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all their grandiloquence of writ excelleth.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-90">
				<header>
					<p>90</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fast on our Captain’s facund lips depends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as drunk with wonder, all that soul-wrapt crowd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">until at length his travel-story ends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his tale that told of noble deeds and proud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The high-conceiv’ed intent the King commends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Kings to not’able feats of warfare vow’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their Lieges’ old and val’orous strain extols,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>their loyal spirits and their noble souls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-91">
				<header>
					<p>91</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Th’ admiring audience to recount are fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">each case, as each one best could understand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">None from the hardy Folk could turn their eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who by such long-drawn ways the waves had span’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Now, as the Delian youth turns round the rein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lampetia’s brother held with feeble hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and in the Thetian arms way-weary falls;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the King hies sea-borne to his royal halls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-92">
				<header>
					<p>92</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How pleasant sound the praise and well-won glory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of man’s own exploits as man hears them chime!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for noble travail, actions digne of story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that dim or equal those of passèd Time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Envy of famous feats untransitory</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hath ’gendered thousand thousand deeds sublime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Brave who loves to tread in Valour’s ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pants for the pleasure of his fellows’ praise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-93">
				<header>
					<p>93</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Achilles’ glorious feats could not so ’flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor Alexander’s soul to fight inspirèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as he who sang in numbered verse his name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such praise, such honour most his soul desirèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nought but the trophies of Miltiades’ fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">could rouse Themistocles with envy firèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who owned his highest joy, his best delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>came from the voices which his feats recite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-94">
				<header>
					<p>94</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Vasco da Gama striveth hard to prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that these old travels in world-song resounding</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">merit not glory nor men’s hearts may move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">like his sore travails Heav’en and Earth astounding.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yes! but that Hero, whose esteem and love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">crownèd with praise, prize, honours, gifts abounding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Lyre of Mantua, taught her Bard to chaunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas’ name, and Rome’s high glories vaunt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-95">
				<header>
					<p>95</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Scipios and Caesars giveth Lusia-land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gives Alexanders and Augusti gives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but she withal may not the gifts command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose want rears rough and ready working-lives:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Octavius, prest by Fortune’s heaviest hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with compt and learned verse her wrong survives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, certès, Fulvia shall this truth deny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gláphyra’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref-133" epub:type="noteref">133</a> wit entrapt her Anthony.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-96">
				<header>
					<p>96</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Goes Caesar subjugating gen’eral France,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet worked his arms to Science no offence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this hand the Pen compelling, that the Lance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he vied with Cicero’s gift of eloquence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">What most doth Scipio’s name and fame enhance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is of the Com’edy deep experience:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Homer wrote that Alexander read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>we know, whose roll ne’er left his couch’s head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-97">
				<header>
					<p>97</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In fine, the nations own no Lord of Men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that lackt a cultured learnèd fantasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Grecian, Latian, or barbarian strain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">only the Lusian lacking it we see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Not without shame I say so, but ’twere vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to hope for high triumphant Poesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>till men our Rhymes, our Songs shall lay to heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for minds Art-ign’orant aye look down on Art.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-98">
				<header>
					<p>98</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For this, and not for Nature’s fault, be sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Virgil nor Homer rise to strike the lyre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor shall rise ever, an this mode endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pious Aeneas or Achilles dire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But⁠—worst of all⁠—it maketh man so dour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">austere, rough, frigid to poetic fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>so rude, so heedless to be known or know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>few heed the want and many will it so.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-99">
				<header>
					<p>99</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Let grateful Gama to my Muse give grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for the great patriot-love that gars her sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Lyre for all her Sons, and aye retrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the name and fame of ways and wars renown’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor he, nor they who call themselves his race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">e’er in Calliope a friend so found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>or from the Tagus-maidens boon could claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to leave their golden webs and hymn his name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-100">
				<header>
					<p>100</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Because fraternal love and friendly will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that deals to every Lusian Brave his meed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of laud, this thought, these resolutions fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my gentle Tagides; and this their creed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet ne’er let human bosom cease to thrill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with Hope to dare and do some mighty deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>since or by these or, haply, other ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he ne’er shall forfeit prizes, value, praise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
