<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Tethys inviteth the Navigators: The Siren’s prophetick Song, wherein she toucheth upon the principal achievements and conquests of the Portugueze Viceroys, the Governors, and the Captains in India until the days of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.</abbr> Joam de Castro: Tethys with Da Gama ascendeth a Mount, whence she showeth him the Spheres, terrestrial and celestial: Description of the Globe, especially of Asia and Africa: The Navigators quit the Island; and, pursuing their Voyage, happily reach Lisbon.</p>
				<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>At tables spread with life-restoring food, (1⁠–⁠74)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>’Companied by their Nymphs, the Lusians bold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hear of their Future singular and good,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And daring deeds in number’d verses told:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tethys displays them all that Ocean-flood (75⁠–⁠143)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Girdeth, and circleth Heaven’s luminous fold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dwarfed to a scanty volume; when the Fleet (144⁠–⁠end)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Homewards her well-loved Tagus flies to greet.</span>
					</p>
				</div>
			</header>
			<section id="stanza-10-1">
				<header>
					<p>1</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now had the glowing Amourist, who won</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fair faithless Larissaea’s love, incline’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his steeds where lies, girt by the great Lagoon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Temistitam, the western world behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Favonius’ breath the brenning of the Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">cooleth, and o’er the nat’ural tanks his wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>crisps the sea-mirror, and awakes the Lily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>slumb’ering with Jasmin through the noontide stilly:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-2">
				<header>
					<p>2</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When the fair Nymphs, who each her lover led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hand linkt in hand, conforming and content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">trooped where the radiant Pleasaunce reared its head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all gay with gold and metals lucident;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when bade the Queen that tables there be spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with varied viands chosen, excellent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for loved and loving vigour to restore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the pow’ers which Love from weary nature bore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-3">
				<header>
					<p>3</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There on the radiant thrones, rich, crystalline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sit the blithe couples, cavalier and dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while on the golden dais in state recline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the lovely Goddess, Gama loved by Fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Delicious dainties, delicate, divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that ántique Egypt’s lux’ury sink to shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>heap the huge chargers of the tawny gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from far Atlantis-treas’ury hither roll’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-4">
				<header>
					<p>4</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The wines of fragrant scent not sole excel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Falernus’ vintage, proud Italia’s boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but e’en th’ Ambrosia Jove esteems so well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and eke esteems his sempiternal Host;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in cups where steely file may not prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they spume crisp foam that glads man’s innermost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>bosom, and warms his heart with sudden glow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and with ice-water temper’d, leap and flow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-5">
				<header>
					<p>5</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Told were a thousand tales of joy and mirth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sweet smiles met subtle sayings warm with wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which to this course and that gave double worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and sharpened edge to blunted appetite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor of the Harp harmonious was there dearth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(which in profoundest Pit the naked Sprite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>awhile can respite from eternal pain),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sweeten’d by Siren-voice of Angel-strain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-6">
				<header>
					<p>6</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus sang that Nymph, the fairest of her kind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her descant ech’oing down the halls sublime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with consonance of instrument combine’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and all conforming to one tone and time:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">A sudden silence husheth every Wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and makes the Wavelet plash with softer chime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while salvage animals in nat’ural lair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to slumber charmed, a dreamy music hear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-7">
				<header>
					<p>7</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her voice of silver raiseth to the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the coming race of Barons high renown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose prototypes were shown to Proteus’ eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">within the hollow Sphere’s diaph’anous round;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-192" id="noteref-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Jove’s goodly present and the choicest prize</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">giv’en him in vision. To the Realm profound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the tale prophetick told he, and the Maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in Mem’ory’s depths the glorious hist’ory laid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-8">
				<header>
					<p>8</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Subject of buskin ’tis, and not for sock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what in that vasty Lake the Nymph made known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">things from Iópas hid and Demodoque;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Phoeacian this, and that of Carthage-town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thee, my Calliope! I now invoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in this mine éxtreme labour, thou alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>canst for my writing to my sprite restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the gust of writing, which I ’joy no more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-9">
				<header>
					<p>9</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My years glide downwards, and my Summer’s pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">mergeth in Autumn, passing, ah! how soon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Fortune my Genius chills, and loves to chide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my Poet-soul no more my boast and boon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Hopes long deferrèd bear me to the tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of black Oblivion, and eternal Swoon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But deign to grant me thou, the Muses’ Queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to praise my People with my proper strain!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-10">
				<header>
					<p>10</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sang the fair Goddess how the wide Seas o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from Tagus bank, whence Gama cut his path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall sail strong Navies, conq’uering ev’ry shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Indic Ocean sucks his mighty breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">How all the Kings, who Géntoo gods adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and dare our yoke reject shall rue the wrath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of hard and hardy Arms, with steel and lowe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>till low to Gama or to Death they bow:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-193" id="noteref-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-11">
				<header>
					<p>11</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of one she chaunted that in Malabar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-194" id="noteref-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">held of the Priesthood highest dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who, lest be loosen’d with the singular</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Barons the knot of love and amity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall see his towns, his cities in the war</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with fire and sword, and wrath and cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>undone, which potent Samorim shall wage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the stranger such shall be his rage.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-12">
				<header>
					<p>12</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And eke she singeth how shall join the Fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in Belem moor’d, to ’bate this deadly bane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when of his burden nought could Ocean weet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our great Pacheco,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a> ’Achilles Lusitan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lo! as he ent’ereth all his weight shall greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the curvèd timber and the fervid Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as in the waters every keel that groaneth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sits deeper swimming than its nature owneth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-13">
				<header>
					<p>13</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But hardly landed on those Orient ends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, leaving with the royal Unbeliever</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Cochim-realm, some native troops where bends</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">its salty branches Cochim’s snakey river;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Nayrs’ infernal bands he breaks and rends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in the Pass Cambalam,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a> whereat shall shiver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with freezing fear the Orient’s fiery glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>seeing so few so many men o’erthrow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-14">
				<header>
					<p>14</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Samorim shall summon fresh allies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Kings hurry’ing come from Bipur and Tanor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and where Narsinga’s serrièd crests arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">vowing high valour to their Grand Seignior:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Lo! at his bidding every Nayr-man hies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that dwells ’twixt Calecut and Cananor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>two hostile peoples linkt at War’s demand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by sea the Moormen come, Géntoos by land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-15">
				<header>
					<p>15</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Again shall scatter all their strong array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pacheco grandly bold on shore and Main;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the mighty Meiny he shall crush and slay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and be the Marvel of the Mal’abar plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Again shall dare the Pagan sans delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to offer battle for his bitter bane;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>taunting his Host and off’ering vainest vows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his deaf, and dumb, and heedless Gods to ’rouse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-16">
				<header>
					<p>16</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No more the Passes only now defending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he shall with fire consume thorpe, fane and town:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Hound, waxt wood to see with toil unending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his fencèd Cities on the plain bestrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall drive his soldiers, life so freely spending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">against Pacheco, who with wings hath flown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for double movement: But at single bout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>hither and thither all he puts to rout.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-17">
				<header>
					<p>17</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Shall come in person Sam’orim fight to dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to cheer his forces and fresh force enjoin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but soon a bullet singing through the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall stain him red in lofty palanquin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Naught now availeth him, ne wile ne snare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne force Pacheco deemeth like to win;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he shall vain venoms deal, deal treasons base</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which aye gain less of gain by God’s good grace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-18">
				<header>
					<p>18</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a> shall a seventh time,” she sang, “aspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the brave beleaguer’d Lusian to assail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom toil and travail lack the strength to tire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but save confusion nothing shall avail:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then shall he bring to battle dread and dire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">machines of timber, unknown, terrible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to sink the Carvels by the board assailèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when force and fraud both tried alike have failèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-19">
				<header>
					<p>19</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“On water-plain upheaping fiery hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he now shall ’tempt the Lusian Fleet to ’flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But soldier-science and the war-man’s will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the strength shall weaken wherewithal he came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Ne’er hath a Baron famed for martial skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that starward soarèd on the wings of Fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>rivallèd this, who Palms from all hath won:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illustrious Greece, or Rome, my words condone!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-20">
				<header>
					<p>20</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For, such fierce battles in such manner gainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by a poor hundred or few more, such fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such feints, such strength, such stratagems sustainèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so many hounds not heartless hurled to flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such feats, I say, must seem as Fables feignèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or that the Hosts of Heav’en invoked, alight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>earthward to aid him, shall to him impart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>daring and doing, heart and warrior art.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-21">
				<header>
					<p>21</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor he who in the chàmpaign Marathonian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Darius’ mighty powers piecemeal rendeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor with four thousand men Lacedaemonian</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he who the Pass Thermopylae defendeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor youthful Cocles of the strain Ausonian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who with the whole Etrurian host contendeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Bridge to hold, nor Quintus Fabius e’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>like this in war showed strength and savoir-faire.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-22">
				<header>
					<p>22</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But here the Nymph’s triumphant measure dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shifting to sadden’d murmur low and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she sings ’mid tears and ill-suppressèd sighs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the mighty Gestes that did no grat’itude know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Oh, Belisarius! thou who aye shalt rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in ninefold Choir, and ever nobler grow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>if Mars dishonour’d didst behold in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>one to console thee here thy Shade shall see!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-23">
				<header>
					<p>23</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou hast a Rival, not alone in deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but in his dolence and his guerdon dour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In thee and him two breasts of noblest breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we see degraded to low state obscure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To die in ’spital, on the bed of need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who King and Law like wall of i’ron secure!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus do capricious Kings, whose will demandeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>more than what Justice or what Truth commandeth:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-24">
				<header>
					<p>24</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus do the Kings who, drunk with flatt’ery, feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the charm of show that gains their hearts’ content;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the doles of Ajax’ arm the due they deal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to tongue of vain Ulysses fraudulent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But⁠—oh Revenge!⁠—these goods of little weal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wasted on those who ghosts of Good present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>if brave and gentle Knights miss all their grants,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>such grants but glut their greedy sycophants.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-25">
				<header>
					<p>25</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet thou! who paidest in such sorry ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">such liege, oh King! unjust in this alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">if ne’er ’twas thine to give him grade and praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’twas his to give his King a golden throne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Long as Apollo bathes with blessèd rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this ball of Earth, I swear, shall aye be known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>amid the Great and Good his name and fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thine for Av’arice aye shall bear the blame!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-26">
				<header>
					<p>26</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See now!” she sang, “another<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a> comes in pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of the Blood Royal, and he brings from home</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Son, whose name shall sound o’er Ocean-tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">high as the Roman’s in best days of Rome.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The two with warrior arms to hearts affied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall deal to fertile Quiloa dreadful doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and crown a gentler King of loyal strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who ends the Tyrant’s fell perfidious reign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-27">
				<header>
					<p>27</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Mombasah-city, with her brave array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of sumptuous palace, proudest edifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">defaced, deformed by fire and steel shall pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in kind the tale of byegone malefice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thence on those Indian shores which proud display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their hostile fleets, and warlike artifice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’gainst the Lusians, with his sail and oar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall young Lourenço work th’ extremes of war.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-28">
				<header>
					<p>28</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“What mighty vessels Sam’orim’s orders own</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">covering Ocean, with his iron hail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">poured from hot copper-tube in thunder-tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all shall he shatter, rudder, mast and sail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then with his grapples boldly, deftly thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the hostile Ammiral he shall assail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>board her, and only with the lance and sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall slay four hecatombs of Moors abhor’d.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-29">
				<header>
					<p>29</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But God’s prevision ’scaping human sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">alone who knows what good best serves His end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall place the Hero where ne toil ne might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his lost young life availeth to forfend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In Cháúl-bay, where fierce and furious fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with fire and steel shall fervid seas offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>th’ Infidel so shall deal that end his days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where Egypt’s navy doth conjoin Cambay’s.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-30">
				<header>
					<p>30</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There shall the pow’er of man’ifold enemies⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for only stronger force strong force can tire⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Winds defaulting and fierce injuries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Ocean, ’gainst a single life conspire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here let all olden men from death arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to see his Valour, catch his noble fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second Scaeva<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a> see who, hackt and torn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>laughs at surrender, quarter holds in scorn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-31">
				<header>
					<p>31</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“With the fierce torture of a mangled thigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">torn off by bullet which at random past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his stalwart arms he ceaseth not to ply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that fiery Spirit flaming to the last:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Until another ball clean cuts the tie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so frail that linkèd Soul and Body fast;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Soul which loosèd from her prison fleets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whither the prize eterne such Conq’ueror greets.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-32">
				<header>
					<p>32</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Go, Soul! to Peace from Warfare turbulent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherein thou meritedst sweet Peace serene!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for those torn tortured limbs, that life so rent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who gave thee life prepareth vengeance keen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I hear e’en now the furious storm ferment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">threating the terrible eternal teen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Chamber, Basilisco, Saker-fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to Mameluke cruel and Cambayan dire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-33">
				<header>
					<p>33</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See with stupendous heart the war to wage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">driven by rage and grief the Father flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">paternal fondness urging battle-gage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fire in his heart and water in his eyes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Promise the sire’s distress, the soldier’s rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a bloody deluge o’er the knees shall rise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on ev’ry hostile deck: This Nyle shall fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indus shall sight it, and the Gange shall hear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-34">
				<header>
					<p>34</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“As when some lusty Bull would train and teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his limbs for cruel fight, with horns he playeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on trunk of builder-oak, or mast-like beech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and wounding empty air his might essayeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus ere his keels Cambaya’s Gulf can reach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Francisco, fierce with vengeful ardour preyeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on Dabul,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a> op’ulent harbour, whets his brand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and ’bates the tumid bragging of the land:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-35">
				<header>
					<p>35</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And soon shall scatter, sailing up the Bight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Diu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a> enfamed for siege and battle dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Calecut’s strong Armada weak of fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that trusts to paddles steely mail instead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">She of Melique Yáz, who boasts her might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of balls by thee, O Vulcan! scatterèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall see her Carvels to the frore deep sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where hidden sleeps the humid element.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-36">
				<header>
					<p>36</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“While she of Mir Hosem<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a> which, linkèd fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with grapples waits th’ Avenger side by side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall sight the lopt-off arms and legs float past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sans owner-bodies, o’er the shifting tide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Like flamey bolt on Earth by thunder cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in blinding mist of blood the Braves shall ride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There naught shall strike the shrinking ear and eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>save fire and steel-flash, shout and slogan-cry.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-37">
				<header>
					<p>37</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But, ah! that homeward from such wars victorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bound for the Tagus of his Fatherland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he nigh should forfeit meeds so great and glorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by sad black chance I see in Fortune’s hand!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Cape of Storms that guards his name memorious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall guard his bones, nor blush shall stain its strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that noble spirit from the world to tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Egyptian strength ne’er tore nor Indian snare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-38">
				<header>
					<p>38</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There salvage Caffres shall have pow’er to do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what ne’er could do the pow’er of dext’erous foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and the rude fire-charred club and staff subdue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whom ne’er subduèd ball nor artful bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Forsooth His judgments hide from human view!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Vain fools who vainly judge what none may know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>call a misfortune, term a fate malign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what is but Providence pure, all-wise, divine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-39">
				<header>
					<p>39</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But, oh! what lustrous Light illumes mine eyes,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">resumed the Nymph, as rose again her tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“there where Melinde’s blood-dyed Ocean lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from Lamo, Oja, Brava-town, o’erthrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by hand of Cunha, such a deed ne’er dies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">o’er farthest seas his name shall aye be known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that lave those Austral Islands, and the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saint Lawrence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a> hight and ring the wide world o’er.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-40">
				<header>
					<p>40</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This Light is glance and glare of lucent arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith your Albuquerque’s hand shall tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Hormuz Parsi’s heart which be his harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">refusing gentle rule as yoke of shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There shall he see of shafts the strident swarm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in air revolving with recurvèd aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>upon his archer, for our God shall aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who holy faith of Mother Church would spread.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then waxt the woeful wail a sorer strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“Oh, God, what vision in the further days!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That fair young Prince of Gaul’s imperial vein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so knightly valiant, fain of fame and praise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I see him fighting, stricken, fallen, slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">piercèd in front by Caffre assegais:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blush, Albion! blush, when Britons dare to flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and leave such Prince such óbscure doom to dree!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-41">
				<header>
					<p>41</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There the Salt Mountains<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a> never shall defend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">corruption from remains of men that met</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">War’s doom, and o’er the seas and shores extend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Gerum Isle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a> Maskat and Calayat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till by pure force of arms they learn to bend</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the subject neck, and pay the scot of Fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compulsion sore this wicked Reign shall vex</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and tithe of pearl that Barem’s oyster decks.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-42">
				<header>
					<p>42</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“What wreaths of glorious Palms I see them weave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith by Victory’s hand his head is crown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when he sans shade of fear or shame shall reave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">illustrious Goa’s Island world-renown’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See, forced by Need’s hard law his prize to leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he seeks new favouring chance; and, soon as found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the taken he retakes; such Arm and Art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall conquer Fortune and the self of Mart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-43">
				<header>
					<p>43</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo! he returns and bursts what dares oppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thro’ bullet, lance-plump, steel, fire, strongest hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">breaks with his brand the squadded host of foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the serried Moor, the Géntoo manifold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His inclyt sold’iery more of fury shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">than rampant Bulls, or Lyons hunger-bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that Day<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a> for ever celebrate and digne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Egypt’s Martyr-maid, Saint Catherine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-44">
				<header>
					<p>44</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor shalt thou ’scape the fate to fall his prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">albeit so wealthy, and so strong thy site</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there on Aurora’s bosom, whence thy rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou Home of Opulence, Malacca hight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The poysoned arrows which thine art supplies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Kríses<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a> thirsting, as I see, for fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>th’ enamoured Malay-men, the Javan braves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all of the Lusian shall become the slaves.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-45">
				<header>
					<p>45</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She had more stanzas sung in Siren-strain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lauding her Albuquerque’s high renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when she recalled the pass’ionate deed, the stain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on his white fame that o’er the world hath shone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The mighty Captain whom the Fates ordain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to view his toils win Glory’s lasting Crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>should ever ’prove him kind and loved compeer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of his own men, not cruel judge severe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-46">
				<header>
					<p>46</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In days of hunger and of dire distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sickness, bolts, arrows, thunder, lightning-glint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when the sore seasons and sad sites oppress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his soldiers, rendering services sans stint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">it seemeth salvage act of wild excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of heart inhuman, bosom insolent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to make last penalty of Laws atone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for sins our frailty and our love condone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-47">
				<header>
					<p>47</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Abominable incest shall not be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his sin, nor ruffian rape of virgin pure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">not e’en dishonour of adultery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but lapse with wanton slave-girl, vile, obscure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If urged by jealous sting, or modesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or used to cruelty and harshness dour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man from his men mad anger curbeth not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his Fame’s white shield shall bear black ugly blot.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-48">
				<header>
					<p>48</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Learnt Alexander that Apelles lovèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and his Campaspe gave with glad consent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">though was the Painter not his Soldier provèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nor in hard urgent siege his force was pent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Felt Cyrus, eke, Panthéa deeply movèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Araspas, by the fire of Passion brent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>though he had tane her charge, and pledged his oath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>dishonest love should never break his troth:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-49">
				<header>
					<p>49</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But see’ing the noble Persian ’slaved and sway’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by pow’er of Passion, sans in fine defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he gives light pardon, and thus gained his aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in gravest case, the fittest recompense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Himself perforce the mate of Judith made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Baldwin hight “Bras-de-fer,” but his offence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>her father, Charles, for troublous times condone’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and gave him life the Flanders’ reign to found.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-50">
				<header>
					<p>50</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Again the Lyre its soul of music sheds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and sings the Nymph how shall Soáres fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">air-winn’owing flags whose terror far o’erspreads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the ruddy coasted lands of Araby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Th’ abominable town, Medina, dreads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as Meca dreads and Gidá, and where lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abassia’s ultime shores: while Barbora fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the fate that floodeth Zeyla-mart with tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-51">
				<header>
					<p>51</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, eke, the noble Island Taproban,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose ancient name ne’er fail’d to give her note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as still she reigns superb and sovereign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by boon of fragrant tree-bark, biting-hot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Toll of her treasure to the Lusitan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ensign shall pay, when proud and high shall float</span>
					<br/>
					<span>your breezy banners from the lofty tower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and all Columbo fear your castled power.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-52">
				<header>
					<p>52</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Sequeira,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a> too, far sailing for the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Erythras, new way shall open wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to thee, Great Empire! who canst vaunt of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to be Candáce’s and the Sheban’s nide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Masuá<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a> that hoards in tanks her watery store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he shall behold by Port Arquico’s side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and send explorers to each distant isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>till novel wonder all the world beguile.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-53">
				<header>
					<p>53</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Succeeds Menézes;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a> less enfamed his sword</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall be in Asia than in Africk-land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he shall chastise high Hormuz’ erring horde</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and twofold tribute claim with conq’uering hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou also, Gama! shalt have rich reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for ban of exile, when to high command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>entitled, ‘County’ thou shalt be restorèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to the fair region this thy Feat explorèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-54">
				<header>
					<p>54</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But soon that fatal Debt all flesh must pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherefrom our Nature no exception knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while deckt with proudest Royalty’s array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from Life shall reave thee and Life’s toils and woes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Other Menézes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a> cometh sans delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who few of years but much of prudence shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in rule; right happy this Henrique’s lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by human story ne’er to be forgot.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-55">
				<header>
					<p>55</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Conquer he shall not only Malabar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">destroy Panáné and Coulété waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hurling the bombards, which through hurtled air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">deal horrid havock on th’ opposing breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but, dower’d with virtues truly singular,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he deals to seven-fold Spirit-foes his hest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Covetise with Incont’inence he shall spurn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the highest conquest in the years that burn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-56">
				<header>
					<p>56</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Him, when his presence shall the stars invite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O Mascarenhas brave!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a> thou shalt succeed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and if injurious men shall rob thy right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">eternal Fame I promise for thy meed!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">That ev’ry hostile tongue confess thy might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and lofty valour, Fate for thee decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>far more of Palm-wreaths shall thy glory crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>than the Good Fortune due to thy renown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-57">
				<header>
					<p>57</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Where Bintam’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a> reign her baleful head uprears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Maláca humbling with her harmful hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in one short day the thousand tyrannous years</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with bravest bosoms shalt avenge and ’bate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Inhuman travails, perils without peers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a thousand iron reefs, and dangerous strait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>stockade and bulwark, lances, arr’owy sleet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>all shalt thou break, I swear, all shalt submit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-58">
				<header>
					<p>58</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But Inde’s Ambition, and her Lucre-lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for ever flaunting bold and brazen face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in front of God and Justice, shall disgust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy heart, but do thine honour no disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Who works vile inj’ury with unreas’oning trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in force, and footing lent by rank and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>conquereth nothing, the true Conq’ueror he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who dares do naked Justice fair and free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-59">
				<header>
					<p>59</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yet to Sampaio<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a> will I not gainsay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a noble valour shown by shrewdest blows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that shall o’er Ocean flash like thunder-ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">curded with thousand corpses of his foes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He shall in Bacanor make fierce assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on Malabar, till owns in terror-throes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cutiále,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a> beaten with his battered Fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the dreadful ruin of a rout complete.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-60">
				<header>
					<p>60</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Nor less of Diu the fierce and fere Armade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the dread of Cháúl, daring, proudly man’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with single glance shall fall, till all have fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Hector da Sylveira’s heavy hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Our Hector Portingall, of whom ’tis said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that o’er yon ever armed Cambayan strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>such wrath on Guzerats ’tis his to wreak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as Trojan Hector wreakèd on the Greek.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-61">
				<header>
					<p>61</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then shall succeed to fierce Sampaio’s powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cunha,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a> and hold the helm for many a year;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">building of Chálé-town the lofty towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while quakes illustrious Diu his name to hear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bassein to him her sturdy standard lowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet not sans bloodshed, for with groan and tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Melíque<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a> se’eth his proudest estocade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>storm’d not by firebrand but by sway of blade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-62">
				<header>
					<p>62</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Next comes Noronha,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a> whose auspicious sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Diu from the barbarous Rumé-warman rends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Diu, which beleaguer’d in his warrior way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Antonio da Sylveira well defends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Soon must Noronha doom of death obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when branch of thine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a> O Gama! aidance lends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to govern empire, and his fiery zeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear’s pallid hue to Red Sea waves shall deal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-63">
				<header>
					<p>63</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“From thine Estevam’s hands shall take the rein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">one raised already to a high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by his Brazilian wars, and trophies tane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from the French Pyrat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a> homed upon the sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Then dubbèd Amm’irall of our Indian Main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Damán’s proud Valverte in her panoply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he scales, the first that open gate to thread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by flames and thousand fletchers coverèd.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-64">
				<header>
					<p>64</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To him Cambaya’s King, that haughtest Moor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall yield in wealthy Diu the famous fort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that he may gain against the Grand Mógor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’spite his stupendous pow’er, your firm support:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thence shall he wend, most valiant conqueror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to hem the Géntoo King, in Cal’ecut port</span>
					<br/>
					<span>so let and hinder’d, he and all who hied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with him, retirèd in their blood red dyed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-65">
				<header>
					<p>65</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Low shall he lay the city Repelim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">her Monarch forcing with his men to run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then well-nigh reached the Cape ’clept Comorim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">another wreath of Fame by him is won;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the strongest squadron of the Samorim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who doubted not to see the world undone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>he shall destroy with rage of fire and steel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be’adálá’s self his martial yoke shall feel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-66">
				<header>
					<p>66</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then from all Indus-land thus swept the foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Conqu’eror, coming scepter’d state to claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">finds no resistance where none dare oppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for nations tremble at his terrible name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alone shall risk of War the scourging woes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Baticalá<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a> and dree Be’adálá’s shame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here blood and corpses shall defile the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>deformed by thund’erous gun and fiery brand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-67">
				<header>
					<p>67</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This shall be Martin, who the name of Mart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">beareth and eke the deeds the name that gave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As much esteemed for arms in every part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as wise in stratagem, in counsel grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Castro<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a> succeeds, who Lusia’s estandart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall bear for ever in the front to wave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Successor the Succeeded’s work who endeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that buildeth Diu, this buildèd Diu defendeth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-68">
				<header>
					<p>68</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The fightful Perse, th’ Abassian, and the Rume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who hath revived the name of Rome, their liege,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of varied customs, various in costume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fell tribes a thousand flocking to the siege;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">on Earth against the Heav’ens shall vainly fume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that gars such handful so their lands abridge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In blood of Portingalls this Paynimry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>voweth its crookt and curved moustache to dye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-69">
				<header>
					<p>69</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Dread Basiliscos, Lyons’ fiery flare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fierce Catapults, and mines that hidden spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall Mascarenhas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a> and his Barons dare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and to th’ assurèd Death glad mien shall bring:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Till, when all Hope is fled and reigns Despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Castro, the saviour, cometh offering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>his sons’ young lives, and wills their names survive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God’s sacrifices aye in Death to live.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-70">
				<header>
					<p>70</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“One son, Fernando, sci’on of tree so high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where violentest flames with loudest roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">blow shatter’d ramparts to the smoky sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">there, stricken down on Earth, shall Heav’enward soar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Alvaro, when mankind dread Winter fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and shift from humid path for arid shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>opens the waters ’spite what risks oppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and fighteth winds and waves to fight the foes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-71">
				<header>
					<p>71</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“When, see! the Father cuts the wavy waste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">leading what resteth of the Lusitan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with warman’s arm and arts which e’er be best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he offers battle’s rem’edy sovereign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These scale the remparts and at gateways jest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">those cut broad gates through squads with rage insane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeds they shall do so digne memorious glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>song shall not suit nor Hist’ory hold the story.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-72">
				<header>
					<p>72</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He shall once more upon the field appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a strong intrepid victor, where his sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cambaya’s puissant King<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a> shall strike with fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and hideous hosts of quadrupeds<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a> affright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor less shall fail his puissant reign t’ uprear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Hydalcham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a> when mighty arms shall smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>chastisèd Dábul, mistress of the coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>nor shall spare Pondà’s distant inland post.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-73">
				<header>
					<p>73</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Barons like these, with peers from various parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all worthy marvel and all mastering Fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">raisèd to rank of Mart by martial arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall come the pleasures of this Isle to claim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Their hands shall wave triumphant estandarts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherever keel-edge cutteth Ocean-stream:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such men these Nymphs these banquets aye shall find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honours and Glories to high Gestes assign’d.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-74">
				<header>
					<p>74</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus sang the Siren, while her sister-choir</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with their sonorous plaudits filled the hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wherewith to hail the hour of glad desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">crowning the happy marriage-festival.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">“However Fortune’s wheel shall turn its tire,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with one harmonious accent chaunted all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“renownèd People! rest your souls secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Honour, Valour, Fame, while worlds endure!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-75">
				<header>
					<p>75</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When man’s corporeal necessity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">was with the noble viands satisfied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and when in sweet melodious suavity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all had their lofty future feats descried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tethys, with grace adorned and gravity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that with a higher pomp and double pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>be crowned the revels of this joyous day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to glad and happy Gama thus ’gan say:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-76">
				<header>
					<p>76</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To thee Supremest Wisdom guerdon gave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Baron! who hast beheld with fleshly eyne</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what things the Future hath the pow’er to save</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from Mortals’ petty pride and science vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Follow me firmly, prudent as thou’rt brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to yonder craggy brake with all thy train!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus she, and straightway through a long wood led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>arduous, gloomy, fere for foot to tread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-77">
				<header>
					<p>77</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nor far they steppèd when on culm’inant height</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where stretcht a gem-enamel’d mead they stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Smaragd and Ruby-strewn, so rich the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">presumed ’twas Paradisial floor they trod:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here swimmeth air a Globe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a> through which the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of purest radiance piercèd in such mode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that as its polisht surface clearest clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>so doth its centre and its core appear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-78">
				<header>
					<p>78</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What mote its matter be escapes their eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet ’scapes them not it holdeth in embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">var’ious Orbs, by wand of Him All-wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">disposed to circle round one central place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rolling it sinks and then returns to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and yet ne sinks ne rises; while one face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is shown to all and every part, each part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>begins in fine and ends with heav’enly art:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-79">
				<header>
					<p>79</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Uniform, perfect, and self-poised it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">like th’ Archetype who drew the grand design.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Stood Gama overwhelmed this globe to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with joy, and hope its nature to divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">When thus the Goddess:⁠—“Here th’ Epitome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in little volume, to those eyes of thine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give the gen’eral World, so shalt thou view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where goest thou, shalt go, and what shalt do.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-80">
				<header>
					<p>80</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here see the mighty World-machine appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ethereal where the fourfold el’ements blend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">made by His deep design, His lofty lere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who lacks beginning and who has no end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">He who surrounding holds this shapely sphere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this globe in filèd surface packt and pen’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is God: But what God is th’ intelligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of mortal genius ne’er shall dare pretence.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-81">
				<header>
					<p>81</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This primal Orb, that rolling doth enclose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the lesser circles in its lines confin’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this Sphere, whose flood of clearest radiance flows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">blinding man’s vision and his vulgar mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">is hight th’ Empyrean:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a> Here the Blest repose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">here perfect Spirits bliss eternal find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>inèffable joys which He alone may ken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath no likeness in the World of Men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-82">
				<header>
					<p>82</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Only to this Imperial Sphere belong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Gods of Truth; for Saturn, Janus, I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Jove and his Juno are a fabled throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a mortal figment, a blind fantasy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Only to deck the Poet’s sprightly song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">we servèd; and, if more humanity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>we gained of man, ’twas that his wit hath given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>our names and natures to the stars of Heaven:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-83">
				<header>
					<p>83</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And, eke, because that Holy Providence⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Jupiter of mythologick strain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by thousand Spirits wise in perfect sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ruleth all mundane things it doth sustain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Prophetick Science doth this Truth dispense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Truth so many instances maintain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sprites that be good aye guide and favour man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the bad his course impede whene’er they can.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-84">
				<header>
					<p>84</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here willèd Picture, lief with change to play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pleasing and teaching, mixing gay and grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to give them titles which your olden lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to fabled Gods in poet-fables gave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">For even th’ Angels of th’ eternal day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as Gods enrollèd were in sacred stave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which e’en denies not such exalted name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sometimes to sinner though with falsest claim.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-85">
				<header>
					<p>85</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In fine the God Supreme who works His will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by second worldly causes, all commands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Return we now the works profound to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of His divine and venerated Hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Beneath this circle, where all blissful dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">pure godly Sprites, which fixt for ever stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>another rolleth, and so swift none see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>its course: This is the Primum Mobilé:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-86">
				<header>
					<p>86</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>“And with its rapt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a> and rapid whirl it drags</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">all lesser spherelets which its womb containeth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By work of this the Sun who never flags</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with alien courses Day and Night sustaineth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Neath this swift orb another orb slow lags,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">so slow, so hard a curb its ardour reineth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>while Phoebus makes, with ever splendid face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>two hundred rounds, this moves a single pace.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-87">
				<header>
					<p>87</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>“Lower this other view,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a> enamel’d gay</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with burnisht figures gleaming radiant bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which in it too hold constant ordered way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">orbs on their axes scintillant empight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thou seest well ’tis dight with brave array</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of broad and golden Zone, the Zodiac hight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherein twelve starry forms of an’imals shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that Phoebus’ mansions limit and define.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-88">
				<header>
					<p>88</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold in other parts the portraiture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">limned by the Stars that sparkling glances shed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behold the Wain, attend the Cynosure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and, with her fierce Worm-father, Andromed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Cassiopeia’s beauty lovely pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with turbulent Orion’s gesture dread:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the Swan that doth in song expire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Hare and Hounds, the Ship and dulcet Lyre.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-89">
				<header>
					<p>89</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Beneath this firmamental canopy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou seest Saturn’s sky, that Godhead old:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With faster flight doth Jove below him fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and Mars yet lower, bellick planet bold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In the fourth seat shines Heaven’s radiant eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then Venus leadeth all her Loves enrol’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mercury wends with eloquence divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and ’neath him Dian showeth faces trine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-90">
				<header>
					<p>90</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“In all these orbits motion different</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shalt see; in these ’tis swift, in those ’tis slow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">now fly they farthest from the firmament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">then sweep they nearest earth that lurks below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">even so willed the Sire Omnipotent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who made the Fire and Air, the Wind and Snow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These lie more inward, as thou shalt be shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and Earth with Ocean for their centre own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-91">
				<header>
					<p>91</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Within this centre, Inn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a> of humankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose reckless spirits not alone defy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">suff’erings and ills to stable Earth confine’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but e’en the Sea’s fierce instability;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou shalt see various Continents define’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by blindly raging tides, where parted lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the various Realms which various monarchs sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose varied Customs varied laws obey.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-92">
				<header>
					<p>92</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See high, haught Europe that adores the Rood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for pow’er and polity o’er all renown’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Africk grudging ev’ery worldly good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yon rough, incult and monster-haunted ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose Stormy Cape till now your search withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Nature ’stablished as her Austral bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold this quarter where the Blackmoors dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sans-loys, sans-foys, whose numbers none can tell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-93">
				<header>
					<p>93</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold the Ben’omotápa’s puissant reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of salvage Negros, nude and noisome race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where shall for Holy Faith be foully slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">martyr’d Gonçalo,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a> suffering sore disgrace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This hidden Hemisphere to golden vein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gives birth, which man must win by sweat of face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See from yon Lake, whence Nilus rolls his tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>how springs Cuáma<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a> from the farther side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-94">
				<header>
					<p>94</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold those Blackmoors and their huts that stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sans doors, each castled in his natal nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they trust of Royal Justice the command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and in the candour of the neighbour’s breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behold how furious flies the bestial band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">like flock of dingy stares thick packt and prest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to fight Sofala’s fortress they pretend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which dext’erous Nhaia’s arm and wits defend:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-95">
				<header>
					<p>95</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See there the Lakes that cradle Father Nyle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose ultime sources men of old ne’er knew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See how he waters, ’gend’ering cockadrille,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Abassia-lond whose sons to <strong>Christ</strong> be true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behold how bare of bulwarks (novel style)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they show a better front against the foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See Meroe-island whilom known to fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which now the wild inhabitants Nobá name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-96">
				<header>
					<p>96</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“On distant Africk hills a son of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in Turkish wars shall win the fame of Brave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hight Dom Christóvam shall the hero be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but flesh from destined Death no skill shall save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here view the Coast where shelter from the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and glad relief to thee Melinde gave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Note how yon Rhaptus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a>-stream, whose wide expanse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>natives call Obi, ent’ereth in Quilmance.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-97">
				<header>
					<p>97</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The Cape which Ancients ‘Aromatic’ clepe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">behold, yclept by Moderns Guardafú;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where opes the Red Sea mouth, so wide and deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Sea whose ruddy bed lends blushing hue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This as a bourne was far thrust out to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Asia distinct from Africk, and a few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of the best markets Negro seaboards claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arquico are, Masuá and Súanquem.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-98">
				<header>
					<p>98</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“View éxtreme Suez where, old Annals say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">once stood the city hight Hero’opolis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by some Arsin’oe called, and in our day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she holdeth Egypt’s fleets and argosies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behold the watery depths, where clove his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Moses the mighty in past centuries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asia beginneth here her huge extent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in regions, kingdoms, empires opulent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-99">
				<header>
					<p>99</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See Sinai mountain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a> with her boast and pride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the silver bier of saintly Catherine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Toro-port and Gidá, scant supplied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with fountain-water soft and crystalline:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behold the Straits which end the southern side</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of arid Aden-realms, that here confine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with tall Arzíran range, nude stone and live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whence soft sweet rains of Heaven ne’er derive.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-100">
				<header>
					<p>100</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See threefold Ar’aby, cov’ering so much ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where tawny peoples vague o’er vasty space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whence come the Rabytes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a> best for battle found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">light-limbed, high-fettled, noble-blooded race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Behold the coast that trends to bind and bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yon other Persian Strait, where sight can trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Headland proud the potent name to own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of Fartak-city, erst to Fame well-known.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-101">
				<header>
					<p>101</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold insign Dofar that doth command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for Christian altars sweetest incense-store:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But note, beginning now on further band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Rosalgáté’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a> ever greedy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yon Hormuz Kingdom strown along the strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose fame for riches still shall higher soar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>when the Turk’s galleys, and his fierce Armade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>see Castel-Branco<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> bare his deadly blade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-102">
				<header>
					<p>102</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold of Asabón the Head, now hight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Mosandam, by the men who plough the Main:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here lies the Gulf whose long and lake-like Bight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">parts Araby from fertile Persia’s plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Attend yon Barem Isle, with depths bedight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by the rich pearly shell whose blushes feign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Auroran tints; and view in Ocean brine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Euphrate and Tygre in one bed conjoin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-103">
				<header>
					<p>103</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Great Persia’s noble Empire here behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ever on Destr’ier or in Camp of War,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose sons disdain the copper-tube to mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and hands not horny with the Cymitar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But see yon Gerum Isle the tale unfold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of mighty things which Time can make or mar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for of Armúza-town yon shore upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the name and glory this her rival won.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-104">
				<header>
					<p>104</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here Dom Philippe de Menézes view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">approved a doughty valiant man-at-arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who with his Portughueze exceeding few</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall quell the Lára<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a> Parsi’s potent swarms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Pedro de Sousa too shall make them rue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">reversèd Fortunes, Warfare’s deadliest harms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who had his prowess in Ampáza<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a> shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and took the land by sweep of sword alone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-105">
				<header>
					<p>105</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But now the Narrows and their noted head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Cape Jask, Carpella called by those of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">quit we, the dry terrene scant favourèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Nature niggard of her normal store:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Whilere Carmánia ’twas intitulèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But view fair Indus-flood whose waters pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>adown his natal heights, and in the range</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of neighbour-mountains see the source of Gange.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-106">
				<header>
					<p>106</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold Ulcindé’s most luxuriant land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and of Jaqueta-shore yon intime bay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the monster Bore which roaring floods the strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and ebb which flieth with like force away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See where Cambaya’s rich feracious band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">boundeth re-entering seas, the Gulf Cambay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and thousand Cities which I leave untold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>here hoard their wealth for you to have and hold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-107">
				<header>
					<p>107</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See, runs the cel’ebrate seaboard Hindostánian</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">southward till reached its point, Cape Comori,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">erst ‘Cori’ called, where th’ Island Taprobanian</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">(’tis now Ceylon) encrowns the fronting sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Besides these waves thy people Lusitanian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">who with their doughty arms will follow thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by conq’uering wars shall lands and towns debel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherein your sons and sons of sons shall dwell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-108">
				<header>
					<p>108</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The regions lying ’twixt these Rivers twain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou see’st, with various tribes are infinite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here rule the Muslims; there the Géntoos reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose Holy Writ the Devil did indite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See where Narsinga’s seigniories contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the saintly relicks blessing human sprite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomé’s remains, the Miss’ioner sanctified</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who thrust his finger in Lord Jesu’s side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-109">
				<header>
					<p>109</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here rose the potent City, Meliapor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">namèd, in olden time rich, vast and grand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Her sons their olden idols did adore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as still adoreth that iniquious band:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">In those past ages stood she far from shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when to declare glad tidings o’er the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomé came preaching, after he had trod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a thousand regions taught to know his God.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-110">
				<header>
					<p>110</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here came he preaching, and the while he gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">health to the sick, revival to the dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when Chance one day brought floating o’er the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a forest-tree of size unmeasurèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The King a Palace building lief would save</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the waif for timber, and determinèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the mighty bulk of trunk ashore to train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by force of engines, elephants and men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-111">
				<header>
					<p>111</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Now was that lumber of such vasty size,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">no jot it moves, however hard they bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when lo! th’ Apostle of <strong>Christ’s</strong> verities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wastes in the business less of toil and care:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">His trailing waist-cord to the tree he ties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">raises and sans an effort hales it where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a sumptuous Temple he would rear sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a fixt example for all future time.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-112">
				<header>
					<p>112</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Right well he knew how ’tis of Faith aver’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">‘Faith moveth mountains’ will or nill they move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lending a listening ear to Holy Word:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As <strong>Christ</strong> had taught him, so ’twas his to prove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By such a mir’acle much the mob was stir’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Brahmins held it something from above;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for, seen his signs and seen his saintly life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they fear the loss of old prerogative.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-113">
				<header>
					<p>113</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“These be the Sacerdotes of Géntoo-creed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that of sore jealousy felt most the pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they seek ill-ways a thousand and take rede</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thomé to silence or to gar him slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Principal who dons the three-twine thread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by a deed of horror makes the lesson plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>there be no Hatred fell, and fere, and curst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as by false Virtue for true Virtue nurst.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-114">
				<header>
					<p>114</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“One of his sons he slaughters, and accuses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thomé of murther, who was innocent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Bringing false witnesses, as there the use is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">him to the death they doom incontinent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The Saint, assurèd that his best excuses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">are his appeals to God Omnipotent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>prepares to work before the King and Court</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a public marvel of the major sort.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-115">
				<header>
					<p>115</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“He bids be brought the body of the slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that it may live again, and be affied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to name its slayer, and its word be tane</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as proof of testimony certified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">All saw the youth revive, arise again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in name of Jesu <strong>Christ</strong> the Crucified:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomé he thanks when raised to life anew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and names his father as the man who slew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-116">
				<header>
					<p>116</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“So much of marvel did this Mir’acle claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">straightway in Holy Water bathes the King</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">followed by many: These kiss Thomé’s hem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">while those the praises of his Godhead sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Such ire the Brahmans and such furies ’flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Envy so pricks them with her venom’d sting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that rousing ruffian-rout to wrath condign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a second slaughter-plot the priests design.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-117">
				<header>
					<p>117</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“One day when preaching to the folk he stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they feigned a quarrel ’mid the mob to ’rise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Already <strong>Christ</strong> his Holy man endow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with saintly martyrdom that opes the skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Rainèd innumerable stones the crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon the victim, sacred sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and last a villain, hast’ier than the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>pierced with a cruel spear his godly breast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-118">
				<header>
					<p>118</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Wept Gange and Indus, true Thomé! thy fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">wept thee whatever lands thy foot had trod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">yet weep thee more the souls in blissful state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thou led’st to don the robes of Holy Rood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But Angels waiting at the Par’adise-gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">meet thee with smiling faces, hymning God.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We pray thee, pray that still vouchsafe thy Lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unto thy Lusians His good aid afford.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-119">
				<header>
					<p>119</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And you, ye others, who usurp the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of God’s Apostles, miss’ioners like Thomé,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">say, an ye boast of apostolick claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">why fare not Holy Faith to preach and pray?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If ye be salt see how yourselves ye shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">cleaving to home, where none the Prophet play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>how shall be salted in dark days as these</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Pagans I leave) such hosts of heresies?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-120">
				<header>
					<p>120</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But now this per’ilous theme I pass beyond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">gain we again the limnèd shore and site.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here with the City whereof Fame is fond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bends the long bow-line of Gangetick Bight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Runneth Narsinga rich and potent lond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">runneth Orissa vaunting tissues bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and at the bottom of the Bay’s long line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>illustrious Ganges seeks his home, the brine:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-121">
				<header>
					<p>121</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ganges whose acc’olents bathe, and bathing die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and die in lively faith withal secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whatever sins upon their spirits lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Holy Waters lave them sinless-pure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Cathigam,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a> amid the highest high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in Bengal-province, proud of varied store</span>
					<br/>
					<span>abundant, but behold how placed the Post</span>
					<br/>
					<span>where sweeps the shore-line t’wards the southing coast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-122">
				<header>
					<p>122</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Arracan-realm behold, behold the seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of Pegu peopled by a monster-brood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">monsters that ’gendered meeting most unmeet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of whelp and woman in the lonely wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here bells of sounding orichalc they fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">upon their bodies, by the craftihood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of subtle Queen, who such new custom plan’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to ’bate th’ accursèd Sin and Crime nefand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-123">
				<header>
					<p>123</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold Táváí City,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a> whence begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Siam’s dominions, Reign of vast extent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tenassarí, Quedá of towns the Queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that bear the burden of the hot piment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There farther forwards shall ye make, I ween,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Maláca’s market grand and opulent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whither each Province of the long seaboard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall send of merchantry rich varied hoard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-124">
				<header>
					<p>124</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“From this Peninsula, they say, the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">parted with puissant waves, and ent’ering tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Samátra’s noble island, wont to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">joined to the Main as seen by men of yore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’Twas callèd Chersonèse, and such degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">it gained by earth that yielded golden ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>they gave a golden ep’ithet to the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some be who fancy Ophir here was found.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-125">
				<header>
					<p>125</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But on her Lands-end throned see Cingapúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where the wide sea-road shrinks to narrow way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thence curves the coast to face the Cynosure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and lastly trends Auroraward its lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Pam, Patáne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a> and in length obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Siam, that ruleth all with royal sway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>behold Menam, who rolls his lordly tide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>from Source Chiámái called, Lake long and wide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-126">
				<header>
					<p>126</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou see’st in spaces of such vast extent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nations of thousand names and yet unnamèd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Láós in land and people prepotent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Avás and Bramás<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> for vast ranges famèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See how in distant wilds and wolds lie pent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the self-styled Gueons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a> salvage folk untamèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man’s flesh they eat: their own they paint and sear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>branding with burning iron⁠—usage fere!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-127">
				<header>
					<p>127</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See Mecom river fret Cambodia’s coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his name by ‘Water-Captain’ men explain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in summer only when he swelleth most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he leaves his bed to flood and feed the Plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">As the frore Nyle he doth his freshets boast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his peoples hold the fond belief and vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>that pains and glories after death are ’signed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to brutes and soulless beasts of basest kind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-128">
				<header>
					<p>128</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“This Stream with gentle, bland repose shall greet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in his embrace the Song,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> that swam to land</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from sad and piteous shipwreck dripping wet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">’scaped from the reefs and rocks that fang the strand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from hunger-tortures and the perilous strait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">what time went forth the dour unjust command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>on him, whose high sonorous lyre shall claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>such want of Fortune and such wealth of Fame.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-129">
				<header>
					<p>129</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here courseth, see, the callèd Champa<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a> shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with woods of od’orous wood ’tis deckt and dight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Cauchichina still of note obscure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and of Ainam<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a> yon undiscoverèd Bight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Here the proud Empire famed evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for wide-spread lands and wealth and matchless might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of China runs, and boasts the whole her own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’twixt torrid Cancer and the frigid Zone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-130">
				<header>
					<p>130</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold yon wondrous and incred’ible Wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">this and that other Region built to part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">most certain symbol this which shows to all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Imperial Puissance proud in arm and art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These their born Princes to the throne ne’er call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Nor Son succeedeth Sire in subject heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the prop’erest man as Monarch they devise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some Knight for virtue famèd, brave and wise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-131">
				<header>
					<p>131</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Parforce hide other vasty lands from thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">until what time no land remain unfound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But leave thou not those Islands of the Sea,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">where Nature rises to Fame’s highest round:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">This Realm half-shadowed, China’s empery</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">afar reflecting, whither ships are bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>is the Japan, whose virgin silver mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall shine still sheen’ier with the Law Divine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-132">
				<header>
					<p>132</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here see o’er Oriental seas bespread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">infinite island-groups and alwhere strewed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Tidore, Ternáte view, whose burning head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">lanceth the wavy flame and fiery flood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">There see the groves the biting clove-bud shed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">bought with the price of Portughueze’s blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>here dwell the golden fowls, whose home is air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and never earthward save in death may fare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-133">
				<header>
					<p>133</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See Banda’s Islets, which enamelled glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">various painted by the rosy fruits;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">variegate birds, that flit from bough to bough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">take tithe and tribute of the greeny nuts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Borneo’s sea-girt shore where ever flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the perfumed liquor’s thick and curded gouts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the tears of forest-trees men ‘Camphor’ clepe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>wherefore that Island crop of Fame shall reap.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-134">
				<header>
					<p>134</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Timor thence further sendeth forth her store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of fragrant Saunders, wood medicinal:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">See Sunda’s Isle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a> so stretch her farther shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that hideth Auster’s regions of appall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The wand’ering men who inner wilds explore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">tell of a stream whose marvels never pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>for, where its lone and single current floweth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>dead wood that in it falls a live stone groweth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-135">
				<header>
					<p>135</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Behold yon land, made island of the sea<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Time, whose trembling flame in vapour swelleth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">see Petroil-fountain, and the prodigy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of od’orous juice the weeping tree distilleth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-263" id="noteref-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sweeter than scent-tears shed in Araby</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">by Cin’yras’ daughter, where for aye she dwelleth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and see, how holding all that others hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>soft silk she hoardeth and the nugget-gold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-136">
				<header>
					<p>136</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See in Ceylon that Peak<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-264" id="noteref-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a> so stark, so gaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shooting high o’er the clouds or mocking sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">The native peoples hold it sacrosanct</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for the famed Stone where print of foot is pight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">O’er lone Maldivia’s islets grows the plant,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-265" id="noteref-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">beneath profoundest seas, of sov’ereign might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>whose pome of ev’ry Theriack is confest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>by cunning leech of antidotes the best.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-137">
				<header>
					<p>137</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Eke shalt thou see toforn the Red Sea strait</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Socotra, famed for Aloë’s bitter growth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I subject other sea-girt Isles to ’wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">your steps where sandy Africk seaboard show’th;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and yieldeth floating mass<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-266" id="noteref-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a> rare, odorate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but whence it cometh none of mortals know’th:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Sam Lourenço see yon famous Isle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>which certain travellers Madagascar style.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-138">
				<header>
					<p>138</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here distant Orient’s new-found climates see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">climes on the world by this your Feat bestowèd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that opened Ocean-portals patent-free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose vasty plain with doughty hearts you plowèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">But in the Ponent als a reason be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">a Lusian’s noble exploit be avowèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who being greatly by his King aggrieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>shall force a passage Fancy ne’er conceived.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-267" id="noteref-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-139">
				<header>
					<p>139</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“See yon huge Region whose contin’uous lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">course from Callisto to the contr’ary Pole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">superb shall’t be by boast of lucent mines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose veins Apollo’s golden tincture stole.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Castile, your ally, worthily designs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to make its barb’arous neck her yoke to thole:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In varied regions bide its various tribes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with different rites which different use prescribes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-140">
				<header>
					<p>140</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But here where Earth spreads wider, ye shall claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">realms by the ruddy Dye-wood made renown’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">These of the ‘Sacred Cross’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-268" id="noteref-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a> shall win the name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">By your first Navy shall that world be found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Along this seaboard, which your arm shall tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall wend him seeking Earth’s extremest bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Magellan who, good sooth, by birth shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a Portughueze in all save loyalty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-141">
				<header>
					<p>141</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And when his courses pass the midway place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which from the Pole Antarctick parts the Line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">he shall behold an all but Giant race<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-269" id="noteref-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">holding the countries which therewith confine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Still onwards lie the Straits that aye shall grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">his name, which sea with sea through land conjoin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>a sea and land where horrid Auster bideth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and ’neath his frozen wings their measure hideth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-142">
				<header>
					<p>142</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thus far, O Portingalls! to you was given</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the feats of future ages now to know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">how o’er those Oceans which your keels have riven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">great-hearted Barons grandest deeds shall do:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">And hence, since all with mighty toils have striven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">toils by whose Fame your favour aye shall grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with your eternal Spouses debonnair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who shall weave glorious crowns for you to wear:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-143">
				<header>
					<p>143</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye can embark, for fav’ouring blows the Wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and to your well-loved home the seas be clear.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Thus spake the Goddess, and the Braves incline’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">from the glad Island of sweet Love to steer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They bear refreshment of the noblest kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">they bear the longed-for Comp’any, each his Fere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>the Nymph that ever shall in heart abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>long as the sunshine warmeth land and tide.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-144">
				<header>
					<p>144</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So fared they, cutting through the Main serene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with favouring breezes that ne’er blew in ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">till they had sighted that familiar scene</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">their Fatherland, and ever fond desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">They past the Tagus-mouth, our stream amene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and gave their Country and their dread loved Sire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who willed their voyage, glory and renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and added lustrous titles to his crown.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<section id="stanza-10-145">
				<header>
					<p>145</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>No more, my Muse!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a> no more, for now my Lyre</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">untunèd lies, and hoarse my voice of Song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">not that of singing tire I, but I tire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">singing for surd and horny-hearted throng.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Favours which Poet-fancy mostly fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">our Land gives not, ah, no! ’tis plunged too long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>in lust of lucre, whelmed in rudest folly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of vile, austere and vulgar melancholy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-146">
				<header>
					<p>146</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nor ken I wherefore, by what Fate indign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">she ’joys ne genial pride, ne gen’eral taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">which strengthen mortal spirit and incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to face all travail with a happy haste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Wherefore, O King! thou whom the Will Divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">hath on the kingly throne for purpose place’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>look that thou be (and see the realms of Earth)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>sole Lord of vassals peerless in their worth!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-147">
				<header>
					<p>147</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Look how they gladly wend by many a way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with raging Bulls’ or rampant Lyons’ might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">self-doomed to sleepless night and foodless day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to fire and steel, shaft-show’er and bullet-flight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To torrid Tropicks, Arcticks frore and grey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">the Pagan’s buffet and the Moor’s despight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to risks invis’ible threating human life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to wrack, sea-monsters and the waves’ wild strife.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-148">
				<header>
					<p>148</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All risks to serve thy cause they dare affront,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to thee though distant yield they homage due,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of ev’ry hard command they bear the brunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">sans answer, ever prompt and ever true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">On single look of favour could they count,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">infernal Demons, black with Hell’s own hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>with thee they fain encounter, and they dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>unconquer’d Conqueror their King declare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-149">
				<header>
					<p>149</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Favour them alway, gladden every face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with thy fair Presence, blithe Humanity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of rig’orous rule relieve them, deal the grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of milder law that leads to sanctity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">impart to long Experience rank and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">an with Experience ’habit Honesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>to work thy Sovran will; thus all shall trow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>what things befall them, Whence and When and How.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-150">
				<header>
					<p>150</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All favour thou in Duty’s different way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">as in each life the storèd talent lies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Let the Religious for thy gov’ernance pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and beg a blessing on each high emprize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">fast they and fash their flesh for those who stray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">in vulgar vices, and as wind despise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambition, ne’er shall holy Priest mislead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>glare of vain-glory, nor of gain the greed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-151">
				<header>
					<p>151</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Foster the Cavaliers with fair esteem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">that oft their fearless, fiery blood have lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to spread not only Heaven’s law supreme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">but eke thy royal Rule pre-eminent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Such men who fare to face each fell extreme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">of climate in thy cause aye diligent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>conquer a double foe; the fone that live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and (deadlier task) with dark, dumb danger strive.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-152">
				<header>
					<p>152</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So do, my Sire! that sons of famous lands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Britons, Italians, Germans and the Gaul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">ne’er vaunt that might of mortal man commands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy Portingalls, who should command them all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Take counsel only with experienced hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">men who long years, long moons, saw rise and fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many for gen’eral science fitness show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>yet the partic’ulars none save experts know.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-153">
				<header>
					<p>153</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Elegant Phormion’s philosophick store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">see how the practised Hannibal deridèd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">when lectured he with wealth of bellick lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">and on big words and books himself he pridèd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Senhor! the Soldier’s discipline is more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">than men may learn by mother-fancy guidèd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not musing, dreaming, reading what they write;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’tis seeing, doing, fighting, teach to fight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-154">
				<header>
					<p>154</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I, what dare I say, rude, humble, low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">to thee unknown, yes, even in thy dreams?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Yet oft from lips of Babes and Sucklings flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">I trow, the words of wisdom man esteems:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Right honest studies my career can show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">with long Experience blent as best beseems,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and Genius here presentèd for thy view;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>gifts, that conjoinèd appertain to few.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-155">
				<header>
					<p>155</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For serving thee an arm to Arms addrest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">for singing thee a soul the Muses raise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">nought lacks me save of thee to stand confest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">whose duty ’tis the Good to prize and praise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">If Heav’en concede me this, and if thy breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">deign incept worthy of a Poet’s lays;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>as doth presage my spirit vaticine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>viewing thee pace the human path divine:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-10-156">
				<header>
					<p>156</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or do’ing such derring-do, that ne’er Meduse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">shall Atlas-mountain like thy glances shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">or battling on the plains of Ampeluse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Marocco’s mures<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-272" id="noteref-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a> and Terodant to break;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">my now esteemèd and rejoicing Muse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">thy name o’er Earth, I swear, so famed shall make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>an Alexander shall in Thee be shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>who of Achilles envy ne’er shall own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
